So that was January! That is one-twelfth of the year gone already. At least the days are getting lighter. Today sees the departure of the UK from the EU and also today I have been in MoJ for 9 whole months. I still feel I have so much to learn about the Justice system.

I am starting to feel as if work pressures are ramping up again as departments not only prepare for the impact of the 2020 budget, but also start preparing their Spending Review bids for the next four years. Clearly the government will be expecting to find both savings (lower priorities) and efficiency savings as they look to deliver and pay for the election promises. As we enter implementation of new policies there will be lots of new work to develop legislation and evidence to support that legislation which will mean us having to be vigilant to ensure the right evidence and data is used and that its use conforms to the Code. Against all these changes we need to maintain our publication schedules and high PQ and FOI performance targets.

Some good news is that our recent recruitment exercises are starting to deliver new staff, however not all posts were filled and whilst it is good news that some internal candidates have been successful, this then moves vacancies to lower grades. Some results are due out to individuals (maybe) today and early next week.

This Thursday saw the bumper publication of six statistical releases: Youth Justice Statistics (Annual), ‘Offender Management’, ‘Safety in Custody’, Proven reoffending and Payment by Result Statistics, and ‘Community performance’. Of particular note, this time were changes led by Bryce Millard in the Youth Justice Statistics publication and the Proven Re-offending publication published Maryam’s team which included the two latest quarters and not just one. However, credit to all the teams as this is a busy time for all of them and they all published quality outputs on time.
My week has involved a number of meetings as usual. The People Board (looked at how we can expand an analytical community outside of London as we successfully grow the number of our analytical posts and we also looked at our new learning and development platform for DASD – to be rolled out soon). We have also finalised a mini-desk reallocation to accommodate increased headcount and teams that did not exist in DASD when the original desk allocations took place. As a result, we are giving two of our desks in 10SC to the Data Strategy Team (who have previously had no official base and now they will have two desks in each location) – please make them welcome. 

Attending the Information Security & Risk Board, for Adrian, I heard about the unfortunate exposure of our training records (Note – all staff were informed last month) and I made an intervention about retention of personal data and the importance of reviewing its use by analysts rather than automatic deletion after X years. I have been discussing with Damon and David W how we can meet the growing demand to source criminal courts data from the Analytical Platform flat file rather than directly through HMCTS systems. This is of course complicated by issues around quality, timeliness, efficiencies and consistencies both within DASD and with HMCTS published management information. In David Dawson’s absence, I was also left to monitor and handle work on finalising cross-departmental bids for resources from HM Treasury for the Shared Outcomes Fund which has cross government data sharing as a growing priority.

This weekend our family are traveling to Woodley, Reading for a belated third Birthday party for one of our grandchildren. Whether that is a good day or not may largely depend on the M25 and M4 as we have a history of good and bad journeys from and to Billericay.
