I will start my weekly note this week with a clear conscience in reminding you to complete the People Survey because I have now completed mine!

You can access the survey here and the JSAS survey code is: MOJHQ0794.

I have been looking at how our response rate compares with the rest of DASD. DASD has an overall response rate of 40% ranging from CJAS with 47% to AJAS and JSAS with 33%. However looking more closely I believe this data is very flawed as it gives DASD a head count (denominator) of 389 and JSAS a head count of 89 (when I think we have less than 60 posts filled giving us a response rate of nearer 50%. Of course other Units may also have flawed response rates so I am certainly not saying we are top of the league!

This has been a week of lots of meetings for me. I think I had ten meetings on Thursday before one was cancelled. Many of these have been short meetings, 1:1 meetings or catch-ups. 

Three themes that I am concentrating on are the Working Environment and Accommodation Working Group; Business Continuity and Recruitment.

For the Working Environment Group , we had our latest team meeting and two drop-in sessions. Thanks to those of you who dropped in with ideas and suggestions. We are putting the work on a more formal project management basis for reporting to Adrian and the other SRAs with a number of deadlines for early November

Communication is at the heart of Business Continuity arrangements and your Programme Directors (Grade 6 / Band As) should be making sure they can contact you and you can contact them if there are unexpected interruptions to office or IT provision. Amruta, Marwan and Damon are all helping me to lead this.

There have been lots of recruitment discussions and allocations at various times this week and it remains sobering to see how many vacancies we have against a headcount of 69. I am determined that we increase our pipeline of new recruits particularly at Band D level where the GSS recruitment teams cannot deliver enough new recruits. In particular I want DASD to investigate better contact with Universities to develop our own Sandwich Student pipeline and I also want us to investigate getting our own Temporary Statistical Officer intake of suitably qualified graduates who want a taster of analytical work in government before applying to the main GSS recruitment route. To this end I hope we can bring in such candidates on a 1 year fixed-term appointment – so if you know of anyone suitable with regard to family, friends, neighbours get them to send me their CVs.

With a weekend in France fast approaching (next weekend) I had to make a choice of going to get my currency from the St James’s park currency exchange on Thursday (yesterday) or next Monday (with the big weekend for the country in between). I opted for the former!

My wife and I went to the theatre on Tuesday night to see Friendsical – which is a musical parody of Friends cramming much of 10 series and 134 episodes into one stage show. If you are a Friends fan then look out for it on tour across the country. We thought it good enough to transfer to the West End. It brought back many memories of our Friday night TV in the mid-90s to mid-00s when it was Friends and Frasier (9pm-10pm).

Today my eldest daughter and her family are arriving for the weekend. This means my middle daughter and her family will also be popping round to see them so we will have 4  grandchildren aged under 3 with us for much of the weekend. It could be a case of early to bed and early to rise (given their sleep patterns)