This week my new (shared) Diary Manager/ Personal Assistant started – Kayla Medhurst.  She is working closely with the other support staff in Adrian’s central team to learn about the job and the ways of MoJ and she is gradually being integrated to understand my ways of working. Being in a central area can mean someone is easily overlooked by our teams so please look out for Kayla and say hello and invite her your events that would be useful background for her in supporting our teams and in organising meetings and events.

In other staffing news, all of our JSAS, JAC (Judicial Appointments Commission) and JO (Judicial Office) adverts at Band Ab, Band B and Band C levels should be live by early next week. As well as the specific posts listed in the adverts we will also be looking to keep a short merit list for posts that are both similar and require the same advertised competencies. For those of you unfamiliar with applying for posts please do remember to ask your managers for advice and it is always useful to have someone independently review your application form before submitting it.

On Monday I met Kristina Gray and Lee Delaney who hope to breathe new life into the department’s StO/HStO/SStO/FS Statisticians group and we are still looking for volunteers from this group to take forward a number of initiatives that I want support on including updating our Work Programme and Compliance documents and better organising our communications and events for the statistics community (including a visit from Sir Ian Diamond in the New Year).

This week I attended my mandatory Finance License to Operate workshop and I led the latest Statistics Licence to Operate workshop. In the latest Organisational Design workshop (the first of four before Christmas) it was interesting to discuss further our DASD Vision and Purpose, however there were many technological (IT challenges) on the day mainly for those in 10SC.

As the month draws to a close please think about reward & recognition and voucher nominations and please note that our quarter 3 cash reward nominations will be earlier than the end of December to allow processing in time for payments in January. Carly will be sending out more details of this. As Heads of Unit we have just had the summary analysis of DASD Reward & Recognition for the first six months of the year and this will be cascaded to you shortly together with some summary statistics for JSAS. This afternoon, Nick and I expect another challenging meeting with Welsh Government who are pressing for more and more Welsh splits of our data (much of which is not necessarily currently available at source).

The Working Environment and Accommodation group meet again next Monday. We are currently re-visiting desk ratios across the team; nearing the end of the review of our DASD guidelines and our campaign to clear the clutter has been is full swing in 102PF this week – although there is a bit more to do to through away old books and computer manuals from the last century. Sarah is leading discussions with PCAG estates about both our current and future desk and locker needs whilst I am still trying to understand the low temperatures in 10SC. The latest line is “We regularly attend these calls throughout the whole building and rarely find the temperatures out of the government required range of between 20 – 24 degrees.  The temperatures are normally towards the higher end in winter.  The issue is often the fresh air coming in through the vents.  This is essential but can be uncomfortable if you are sat below them.” I am still thinking of a polite response and follow up!

Tonight, I am going to see “Groan Ups” at the Criterion Theatre in Piccadilly with my wife. This is from the Mischief Theatre Company who we are great fans of (The play that goes wrong; The comedy about a bank robbery; Peter Pan goes wrong; and When magic goes wrong). On Saturday we will be seeing our in-laws visiting from Anglesey. Next week is also a shorter week for me as we head to Dartmouth for a long weekend. Apparently, Santa will be arriving by boat to open the Christmas market next Friday evening. I am off from Thursday 28 November to Monday 2 December (inclusive).