This week I saw the new National Statistician in action at the expanded Heads of Profession (Statistics) meeting – that is the annual meeting extended to all Deputy Directors in ONS. The agenda included Working across government functions; an update from the Stats Authority (Office of Statistics Regulation); an update on the GSS Community (with a typical ONS focus; Working in a changing political environment: Collaboration across the community to secure further funding; and finally and address from Professor Sir Ian Diamond. I will give further details in my next JSAS stand-up and through a written summary in due course. The new National Statistician is passionate about the opportunities afforded our communities by new and laege datasets.

Next I want to plug the current pulse survey / temperature check in DASD. You will hear me regularly say that as statisticians and analysts that we, more than anyone, should know the importance of high response rates to surveys so please fill this in – it doesn’t take long. I recognise that we have a high staff turnover at present, but this is an excellent opportunity to understand what DASD staff think in September. On a related note, Sarah Morton and I met our DASD Working Group that is looking at the Working Environment and co-location. Without spoiling their fun, we expect Unit reps to come up with three top tips / quick wins from their Units perspective; Damon will lead a small team to analyse what we know of staff’s views; I will be working with the Organisation team lead to see what they were told when they interview over 100 DASD staff (responses given will remain treated in confidence); Sarah is checking the MoJ/PCAG/ 102PF latest location Strategy; and Sarah and I will offer staff who are struggling with current working practices a ‘drop in’ session. Also on staffing and recruitment fronts we are about the launch the next Managed Moves exercise ahead of the next round of recruitment interviews.

A little worryingly, I seem to be having weekly discussions, with different teams, about revisions. In my role as Head of Profession I am responsible for how we handle revisions in accordance with our revisions policy. Ilarion, on his return, will be setting up a revisions log so that we can better track these and look for common causes from being supplied erroneous data by suppliers, not spotting erroneous data well enough, coding and classification errors and basic mistakes. The handling of errors and revisions a very sensitive matter when set against the Code’s pillars of Trustworthiness, Quality and Value, but particularly Trustworthiness. What is important is that we learn from these examples and put more contingencies in place. Fortunately in some cases the errors and data inconsistencies are spotted in advance of publication although too late to correct. In these cases we are pausing the data (from the latest publication) whilst we investigate and then publish the corrected data when we know that we have resolved the issue. This obviously has to be done in a very open and transparent way including with policy and Press Office.

Carly Gray joined our Senior Management Team (SMT) this week heading up the Civil, Administrative and Family Justice team and had to hit the ground running yesterday’s publication of Tribunal Statistics (Quarterly).

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/tribunal-statistics-quarterly-april-to-june-2019

Also in publication news, the Crown Prosecution Service have published their 2018-19 Violence Against Women and Girls report. This regularly draws on JSAS support particularly from our Criminal Justice team. The report is located  here on the CPS website.

In other staffing news, we are are still welcoming our new Year 1 and Year 2 Fast streamers across the teams, Hannah Grant has returned to Prisons, Probation and Re-offending and Kristina has returned to JSAS after completing her degree at Surrey University. I am struggling to keep up with the changes (and particularly names) so I sense it is time to make sure that our organograms and pictures are up to date.

A number of other high profile issues are continuing including work on Brexit contingencies (e.g. collecting data on any civil unrest); the development of new goals and targets for the Prime Minister’s Implementation Unit and support to the latest expected article (op-ed) by the Prime Minister on crime and justice including how long it takes from offence to prosecution for the most serious offences.

An early heads up that I will be working in Leeds next Thursday (19th) and visiting the prison there on Friday (20th).

This weekend, my priority is to facilitate a small birthday party for my 91 year old aunt on Saturday. She and her husband didn’t have any children so I am effectively the next-of-kin who sorts out her health, care and even food (I take her 3 week’s supply of oven meals at a time and organise a monthly Tesco delivery).