This has been a shorter, but busy week for me. It started out with our mini x-govt statisticians golfing weekend (won by HO with MoJ second and the ex-HO/ex-MoJ team third). The weather was fantastic and a huge surprise given the initial forecasts of heavy rain (even up to the evening before). Given the amount of Perudo we played, maybe we should rename the weekend to include that too. 

Tuesday was a day full of mini-meetings, 1:1s and dealing with lots of Code of Practice specifics and questions from across DASD and wider. On Wednesday we had our fifth 3-hour Organisational Design workshop with Senior Responsible Analysts / Heads of Units. This time we focussed on who the stakeholders are who should influence our organisation and the draft components of criteria of what we would like see as a future successful organisation. Wednesday was also the second meeting of the DASD Data Board where we focused on agreeing our Data Principles. I suggested we needed to be able to demonstrate we were delivering on these before we published what they were to the wider world.

On Thursday we had what I thought was a great JSAS Awayday with a mixture of fun (ice breaker, quiz and modelling) and informative presentations on Payment by results; Disclosure control; and Strengths based interviewing. I am glad so many of you enjoyed the session by Robert Cuffe from the BBC. I hope you found the mini-focus on DASD’s Vision and Mission a useful reminder and that I managed to answer the Q&A session with me openly and honestly. Finally, I never really knew there was a natural Simon Cowell or Paul Hollywood in me – Sorry!

This afternoon I am attending my first (and maybe the first) departmental Strategic Operational Command meeting for Brexit where Sarah Blake will be presenting what the analytical community can do to support analysis an any civil disobedience.

Of the staffing front the results of the latest cross government recruitment are emerging with congratulations to some of our staff who have passed their promotion panels. We are also looking to appoint to back fill Tara’s post and a Grade 7 post in PPAS (Rik’s) with urgency from the Grade 7 passes / Merit list. As an SMT we have also been approving the latest quarterly cash awards for payment hopefully in October. The approval of monthly voucher awards continues to be overseen by Matt’s group of volunteers. Now we are 6-months into the year we anticipate reviewing our standards and guidance for consistency of nominations.

Finally a weekly note at this time of year wouldn’t be the same without a reminder to complete the People Survey. You can access the survey here and the JSAS survey code is: MOJHQ0794

This weekend is another busy one. My Mother-in-law’s 84th birthday is a reason for an annual get together of my wife’s family on Saturday. We are hiring a church hall because with 4 generations including 18 adults and 6 great grandchildren aged under 3 we have outgrown hosting ourselves. After cooking Sunday lunch I will then be off to my housebound 91-year old aunt to take her the latest 3-4 weeks supply of oven meals.