Whilst moving furniture and having new carpets fitted on Monday, I had no idea how much was going to change so quickly as a result of the Prime Minister’s Press Conference that evening.

I suspect this week is a transition week as we all sort out both our personal and working lives for the weeks and months to come. As a senior management team in JSAS we have been considering our business continuity plans and priorities including the minimum essential services that we must deliver, particularly in respect of the PNC. There will be more on this as our ideas and plans develop in response to the specific situations.

Our analytical services have a key role to play in understanding the current and future impacts on the Covid-19 on the criminal justice system. We need a firm benchmark of where we were in 2019 to understand the long-term effects on 2020 and the long-term responses (e.g. understanding court backlogs). We also have an immediate role to play in understanding the latest MI on the impacts on the system from prison capacity; how to deal with those whose court cases are delayed and the impact of no court cases longer than 3 days; and how our court systems could change to adapt to the latest circumstances. The asks of our knowledge and skills are likely to escalate from next week, sometimes with unreasonable deadlines or unreasonable expectations of what early data can tell us. We need to agree what we can scale back to free up capacity. I believe our role as analysts is essential to the department in these challenging times and as statisticians we need to remain compliant with the Code of Practice, particularly with regard to the use of evidence in departmental statements or Ministerial releases.

As individuals, there is a lot of us to get our heads around. My wife is liking the current situation to the year that my twelve-year-old daughter was treated for cancer. I agree. As individuals, we no longer feel in control, suddenly we have started living our lives one day at a time or a few days at a time. We can no longer make long-term plans for holidays or weekends, our social lives are restricted and we are faced with more ‘basic’ challenges such as food shopping, child care, and whether/when we can see family and friends. As such we do need to recognise we are not alone and great strength can be drawn from not only helping each other as friends and colleagues, but also by helping our more vulnerable relatives and neighbours. During that year of cancer treatment, my wife and I dealt with it very differently with regard to our coping mechanisms. For each of us now there is no right or wrong way and we may each need to try out different coping mechanisms from mindfulness to exercise, or from talking to religion. Each of us will deal with this differently and react differently. We have to appreciate those differences and be understanding of them.

Other than Covi-19 associated responses and planning, our SMT have agreed the final voucher and cash Reward and Recognition allocations for 2019/20. The paperwork had to be submitted to Nicki Medhurst today for financial year budgeting and for the pay deadlines to be paid in April. I would like to say a huge thank you to Matt Walker and Ann-Marie Jordan and their team of volunteers who have formed the voucher panel this year. Another huge thank you to Carly Gray who over the last 4 months has introduced a new discipline to our cash award procedures and who spent so long finalising the paperwork for us this week. 
I am really encouraged to see how teams are adapting to virtual working by using the technology. I must admit, I am still catching up and need to learn to use Slack and other tools that you are using. I do feel sorry for our new starters who are arriving at near empty offices and not able to meet their new teams. Well done Georgina on thinking to send us all a photo of Marco on his first day! Please make an extra effort to contact the new staff as they arrive.

This weekend could be particularly challenging for us as it is Mothers’ Day. My wife, Heather, is a teacher, as are two of my daughters, so we are particularly conscious of their wider exposure to the population – there is no social distancing for teachers of 5/6-year olds! For that reason, we have decided to cancel our trip to Kent to see Heather’s Mother on Saturday. My own parents are also in trouble as my Mum fell in the garden on Tuesday (her 84th Birthday). She has clearly done something significant to her leg/hip and can barely walk even with my Dad’s Zimmer frame. However, they will not contact the NHS about this and my contact with them is currently limited to their front door because of their underlying health conditions. We need to get them up and running on Skype, Messenger Video or something similar.

Thank you are for your continued work and the adaptations to your work life that you are putting into place.