Not only has this week been a continuation of Brexit related planning and Spending Review(SR) preparations, but in the crime and justice arena the national news has been dominated by announcements and media coverage of crime and justice – from Prison places to County Lines; and from Stop and Search to Sentence lengths. Our teams have been involved in the preparation and checking of much of the evidence and data used.

The Prime Minister has made it very clear that a successful implementation of Brexit is a top priority and that all departments should be prepared for all eventualities. As part of the Crime and Justice media announcements, this week, it is also clear that the other departmental top priorities for us must be Reducing re-offending (and crime); Ensuring fair sentencing; Modernising the justice system; and building Prison capacity.

I have always been very aware of the statistical community links with Full Fact (the UK’s independent fact checking charity - https://fullfact.org/) and have always recommended that my staff regularly check out their latest work. Indeed, there are often GSS secondment opportunities there. Similarly, I have been very aware of the BBC reality checks in recent years (https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/reality_check). However I was surprised how fact checking was expanding as evidenced when Joe stumbled across a Channel Four reality checker when researching some of the PM’s claims about re-offending which were sourced from FOIs and PQs over recent years (https://www.channel4.com/news/factcheck/factcheck-johnsons-claim-about-super-prolific-criminals-spared-jail). Thankfully the claims passed their checks.

The DASD Senior Management Team (SMT) had a half-day session on Tuesday to discuss a summary of the recent staff interviews about DASD. Adrian will give an update on this shortly and a report will also be made available to staff so you can see what you think our strengths and weakness are as we plan for the future. 

This is a time of seasonal change and disruption for statistical teams as our one-year fast stream placements come to an end and we prepare ourselves for these departures and the new joiners in September and October. The scheme has had some teething problems over the years and this transition has been more problematic this year with Brexit related posts taking overall priority and affecting the timing of allocations.

We also had a very low-key retirement this week with Kunjal Amin retiring after many years in MoJ and even longer in the wider Civil Service. She specifically asked that we did not make a fuss, but we all wish her well in retirement.

This is a short week for me as I am interviewing at DEFRA on Thursday afternoon as they recruit Grade 6 analysts. I am also on Annual Leave on Friday as my wife, Heather, bought us a wine tasting experience day (including lunch). The only problem is that it is in Dedham about 40 miles from where we live so we need a “designated driver”. This weekend we are preparing for the calm before the storm as I pick my eldest daughter (Anna) up early on Sunday morning from Reading. She is staying with us for 5 nights with Caleb (2 yrs 7 months) and baby Freya (2 months) before her husband picks them up to take them home on Thursday evening. I have a feeling that 5 nights with a baby might seem a long time next week. 