My New Year’s return to work was sadly interrupted by illness last week with a number of days in bed with very high fevers and bad headaches, especially through the nights. As such memories of the Christmas break seem so long ago. As well as seeing family, Christmas highlights included “Magic goes Wrong” at the theatre, my first Escape Room experience, the first pantomime for my eldest two grandchildren (Dick Whittington); an Escape game themed dinner party (replacing those traditional Murder Mystery dinner parties) and of course lots of family get togethers.

As we enter a new year and new decade, we have a new government who want to make a new start on many things and our areas of work will be central to some of those ideas from sentencing to re-offending and from probation to understanding “what works”. Nick Mavron and I were discussing yesterday how we can influence our re-offending contributions rather being held at the mercy of a policy scattergun approach of requests for help from different teams.

This week saw the People Survey results published for each Unit. Just a reminder to you that our response rate was actually much better than shown because of our vacancies over the period. Those who know me well will know that I do not pay much attention to the overall Engagement Index itself because of the way it is constructed. Instead I like to focus on the 9 themes and the detail within them. I will review the results with our Senior Management team and I expect each Grade 6 team and our team of Engagement volunteers to play a significant role in identifying what we can do better to improve things for you. It is important that you have forums to say what you want improved.

As I have physically recovered this week, the benefits of working from home have been apparent as I have regained by stamina without having to commute and been able to more easily fit in medical appointments. In general, I am finding that Skype is good enough for most meetings of my meeting and the biggest barrier seems to be getting the Video Conferencing kit to work in the offices. I cannot stress enough the importance of keeping the video on to maintain our team engagement.

With regards to work this week, we have seen a lot of headline publicity for the Knife and Offensive Weapon Sentencing publication – well done to that team for getting that published successfully whilst below strength. I have been involved in lots of discussions and meetings around the impact of HMCT’s system modernisations which are of course affecting forecasting (e.g. sitting days) as well as our own statistical publications; reallocation of a few desks in DASD to accommodate the new EEE Unit; recruitment (both promotion and recruitment panels (HStO, SStO) as well as allocations from the GSS (StO, HStO, SStO); a meeting with the Office of Statistics Regulation about their 2020/21 workplan and intention to focus on re-offending and criminal history publications; the future plans for civil unrest contingencies; access to HMPPS data by externals and the list goes on.

More formal meetings this week have continued with our weekly Organisational Design Workshops; the DASD Data Board (including a presentation by David Wall on adapting to HMCTS system changes); the weekly Human Resource meeting; and our own SMT meeting.

I suspect this weekend and future weekends may be dominated by my middle daughter’s thoughts of moving house meaning that they need a very clean and tidy house for Estate Agents to visit and take photos. In turn, this means the grandchildren will need looking after! Our friends who are visiting on Saturday evening should have some interesting stories to tell as one of them just stood as a Conservative candidate in a very strong Labour stronghold in Newcastle.  He lost but increased the share f the vote to around 25%. His previous career was in the Foreign & Commonwealth Office when he served overseas in a three African countries (one as deputy commissioner entertaining a Tony Blair visit).
