This has been a strange week in many ways. Traditionally we would have been winding down and looking forward to Christmas, but instead we have been continually on alert for the implications of the new government and the work to support such a challenging new agenda and the likely downstream activities that we will have to be prepared for come the New Year.

Before I go on, a quick mention of Bryce Millard’s Coffee & Coding session last Friday including analysis of my Weekly Emails to you. He showed what was important to me, who was important to me; a list of people close to me (including Santa and Peter Pan) and was even predicting my moods! I am sure his slides can be made available. Most importantly, it was well delivered. Well done Bryce.

A lot of my time has been taken up with recruitment this week. As well as giving careful consideration of the nine Garde 7 application forms individually by myself, Damon and Lucy, we then had to agree our views and scores collectively; and finally, I had to complete all of the associated paperwork. We expect these successful candidates to be notified of interview in early January with interviews to be held in the third or fourth week of January. Meanwhile Carly Gray is leading the SStO recruitment and Mark Edwards the HStO recruitment. They are both a little ahead of me with regards to timetables.

I continue to be involved in the Organisational Design work and to keep this going at pace we are looking to have weekly meetings of all the SRAs in the New Year. At the People Board we spent time focussing on Inclusion & Diversity and the Governments’ strategy for broadening the Civil Service outside of London. One of the key messages I took from this was our guest speaker’s introduction of the phrase “intersectionality” where an individual may fall into a number of protected characteristics and also various different life stages. It is important that underrepresented staff see and recognise role models that they can associate with.

As a JSAS senior team we also had two productive meetings on Tuesday afternoon to discuss (1) our recruitment, resources and priorities and (2) our reward and recognition including a discussion of supporting our most talented individuals and those who we think would benefit with more support. Special thanks to Nick for his additional work on Tuesday afternoon for Cabinet Office briefing on CJS effectiveness bringing together data from other DASD teams. Immediate feedback (the next day) from the Deputy Private Secretary to the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice said “….. I just wanted to pass on that a number of colleagues at Cabinet Office commented that these slides were really high-quality material, with well-chosen stats and presentation. They also really appreciated that it was such quick work.” Well done Nick – I am not sure whether that counts as you winning or losing the toss of the coin as to who did this!
This afternoon, David Dawson and I are meeting representatives from the Institute of Fiscal Studies to discuss Data Sharing and the Micro Data Lab etc. Adrian sees the IFS as useful allies to improve the CJS evidence base going forward.

This week the latest Legal Aid statistics were published on Thursday. Thanks to Matt, Ann-Marie, Mark and their teams for getting this out despite all the distractions going on in recent weeks. 
A big thank you to Adam, Georgina, Iwan, Mark for organising our JSAS Festive afternoon of games and quizzes on Thursday. I certainly enjoyed the afternoon although I am a bit apprehensive about any video evidence of me having chocolate over my face. Should I be worried that I am so recognisable in my baby photo? I also got a Christmas message from Liz Whiting who apologised for not being able to make the event.

Katie Scott gave us a useful reminder to put our photos on the JSAS organogram. In 2019, I want to go further and given the strong feedback we are getting across DASD (and within JSAS) I expect to see more team working together days (on a regular basis) within JSAS; all photos on Outlook and our organograms and more use of Skype meetings with videos on. This is all exceptionally important for new staff and especially new staff in their first jobs.

A lot has happened for me personally in 2019 with my move to MoJ and having two new Grandchildren. I feel ready for a rest over the next two weeks although I don’t think I am going to get one with visits, visitors and activities planned every day between now and 6 January.
I would personally like to thank you all for all the hard work, help and assistance you have given me this year and I wish you all a well-deserved break.
