I must admit that having a holiday is lovely, but returning to an Inbox full of emails; a calendar full of meetings (condensed into a small window given the holiday period); and the usual challenges of September (when many quarterly meetings happen after a summer lull), sadly makes the holiday seem a long time ago. I can’t believe that it was only four days ago that I was in Madeira.

Tuesday was dominated by my role as the Chair of the GSS People Committee with a three hour meeting at ONS, Drummond Gate. On Wednesday I had a number of management meetings including the monthly DASD Data and Analysis Board which focussed on Prioritisation, Data Strategies and where we are on Automation. On Thursday, the big meeting of the day was our fourth Organisational Design half day workshop with Adrian – this time focussing on our Stakeholders and their importance to us and their interest in us. Today is the first meeting of the DASD Data Board (including a paper led by David Wall and Karik on Crest and Xhibit data feeds).

Stars of the week are probably Tara and her team, particularly in the absence of Bridgette and with me only just returning from annual leave. This week has required a lot of last minute decisions and drafting to explain that some previously published data has included errors that we have been unable to fully explain in the classifications of the data in the source systems resulting in us now temporarily withdrawing those tables. At the same time, some data that was unavailable earlier in the year, has now been published for the first time. 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/civil-justice-statistics-quarterly-january-to-march-2019

Also in Tara’s area remains a lot of Ministerial interest, media interest and MP interest in mortgage repossessions generated by the last publication a month ago. This is sensitive because we can not name the individual mortgage lender behind the increase nor the reasons why which could both be considered commercially sensitive. Given the current economic climate, there is obviously an interest in this data (mortgage repossessions) as a leading economic indicator.

Slightly more widely, the UK Statistics Authority (Office of Statistics Regulation) have been looking closely at the Prime Minister’s speech on crime and justice shortly after he came to office and they have been fact checking it. It appears that one of the sources of the information was a media FOI (answered by us) subsequently reported in national media a year or two ago. However, at the time there was a ‘pause’ in the publication of FOI replies due to resource constraints so the information was effectively only ‘partially’ in the public domain. The UKSA / OSR and considering whether to escalate this, however as I explained to them there is wide spread inconsistency across government about publication of FOIs.

There has also been a lot of work associated with the latest DASD Managed Moves exercise that is being carried out ahead of the current recruitment exercise. This is to ensure job descriptions are available for those interested in managed moves. I would also like to thank the small teams who helped with paper sifts for the Band B, C and D recruitments where interviews will hopefully be completed by the end of the month.

To be honest, I haven’t had time to think about what I am doing this weekend. I know we are going to a house warming party in our road on Saturday evening. I am also on annual leave on Monday – playing golf for only the second time this year. I suspect I can easily score more at golf than England’s cricketers at Old Trafford.