My week started at the National Archives in Kew with the rest of the DASD senior leadership team building our leadership capability and getting to know each other. We had to take a special item to talk to our colleagues about as the ice-breaker. Unexpectedly (and at very short notice) it turned out that we had to fill exactly three minutes in doing so I ended up talking more about the special items that I hadn’t taken (Make a Wish badge, Sugarbabes photo, West Ham memorabilia, Snooker cue, Olympic torches) rather than the one that I did (photo of me with Meerkats). It was good to spend more time getting to know each other and finding out about what makes each other tick. Of course, what goes on in Kew, stays in Kew! Although we did come away with a new enthusiasm for getting the Organisational Design work completed so we could start refreshed Business Planning for 2020/21 early in the new year.

On Tuesday, our JSAS senior management team had our quarterly meeting with team building (Perudo – it was too wet for mini-golf), lunch, and two hours of some of the longer-term discussions that get squeezed out each week including Business Plans; Staffing; Reward & Recognition; Business Continuity Plans; Risk Registers; Error Logs; quarterly JSAS Awayday; and Brexit). After almost five months I am starting to feel more comfortable about the topic areas and challenges and I am beginning to have a feel for what we do well and what we need to improve as a management team. The expression of interest (TCA Grade 6 cover) for Liz’s period of maternity leave should go live early next week.

On Wednesday. Liz and I were interviewing for Grade 7s through the recent DASD campaign. We held two interviews with a third postponed to Monday. I couldn’t work out where everyone was in 10SC on Wednesday until I remembered that each of the three teams had a publication out the next day so it was Pre-Release day (in 102PF). Congratulations to Carly and Ann-Marie on their first JSAS publications and to Sarah not only on her wedding but the fact that she arrived back from the wedding on Pre-Release Day (now that’s delegation!). Publication links are here:

Criminal Court Statistics (Quarterly)
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-court-statistics-quarterly-january-to-march-2019
Family Court Statistics (Quarterly)
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/family-court-statistics-quarterly-april-to-june-2019
Legal Aid Statistics (Quarterly)
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/legal-aid-statistics-quarterly-april-to-june-2019

On Thursday I worked at home – having had one of those weeks with trains including a 2 hour journey to Kew (standing) and a three hour journey home (on Monday); delays on Tuesday night after rain affected the signals and Liverpool Street station; and on Thursday morning I finally gave up and went home after 35 minutes when we had three trains in an hour instead of around the usual 9 rush-hour trains between 7am-8am.

Sarah Morton and I held our first ‘drop-in session for the Working Environment and Accommodation issues workstream (although we only had two visitors) so look out for the next two sessions if you want to having a say about anything on your mind.  I can also announce that the planning for a DASD awayday is about to start (led by Jon Roberts and myself) and there will shortly be a call for helpers to help us organise an agenda, speakers and activities for this in the Central Hall.

It has of course been a big week on wider fronts particularly in Parliament and after the Supreme Court ruling. You will have seen from me the other communications that No Deal Brexit planning is still required with volunteers (hopefully) needed in other front-line departments from Home Office to BEIS.

This is also time for a final reminder for Reward & Recognition nominations for this month / this quarter (deadline pretty much today - Friday!).

This weekend started early with a wedding reception on Thursday evening. Then we are having our monthly Fish ‘n’ Chips takeaway with my parents on Friday evening. On Saturday we are babysitting for Lydia (2yrs 9 months and Matthew 3 months) as Megan and Gwion go out for lunch on Saturday and then we are entertaining friends at our house for an evening meal. I will either cook chicken fricassee or Jamie’s chicken and pesto in puff pastry. On Sunday I shall provide the usual Sunday lunch for the family, but I might downsize from the traditional roast this week.