For the second week running, my working week between meetings has been dominated by discussions about Purdah and the interpretation of these Pre-Election rules. In addition, I had two meetings with other Heads of Profession (including Steve E-E) and one with our MoJ Head of News where there was a lot of talk of the election. Our Head of News (Samana Haq) is a former MoJ journalist and she is interested in seeing the election from effectively ‘the other side’. As well as the publication protocols around Purdah we have having to be very sensitive with our publications and commentary and we are avoiding any ‘new’ data or significant changes that have not been pre-announced. Any significant unannounced change could lead to our neutrality being questioned.

Publications this week included two JSAS statistical releases: Mortgage and Landlord Possession statistics: July to September 2019 and Criminal Justice Statistics quarterly: June 2019. Both were successfully published with resource challenges so thank you to everyone involved.

Other meetings for me this week have seen the Data First project gaining momentum; Touchpoint meetings with some of my Grade 6s; a GSS People Board pre-meeting; and a number of regular and routine meetings including 1:1 catch ups. I also had a meeting with YJB and YSC analysts and officials to discuss the handling of discontinuities in their publication due early in the new year. I am looking forward to Kayla Medhurst starting next week as Diary Manager to myself and Mike Marriott.

We are trying to maintain momentum of the Working Environment and Accommodation group which is why we are focussing this week on removing the clutter in 102PF so we have greater options for positioning of the touchdown desk and other storage options. The bins are arriving shortly if not already! The Working Environment theme is a reminder of the importance of Unit days together. These awaydays and social activities are essential for maintaining and developing our working together which are especially important with flexible working. To that end I am hoping that all of JSAS will get together for our next event on the afternoon of Thursday 19 December. Hopefully with a couple of months’ notice (invites were sent some time ago) you can, or will be able to, juggle your plans that week so that you can attend.

A quick plug for the latest PCAG Newsletter circulate on Thursday and the article and photo from the analysts visit to Leeds prison. 

The JSAS Social on Thursday saw 11 of us play crazy golf at Junkyard Golf (Shoreditch) where we played in two groups (of 6 and 5 players) on different courses. We then went for a drink afterwards. It was good fun with scores ranging from 24 to about 32 over the 9 holes. Sadly no holes in one for me, but a decent score all the same. Thanks to Iwan, Kristina, Marwan and Georgina for putting up with my competitive spirit. Well done to Craig who also scored 24 in the second group – talk about finishing work in JSAS on a high!

This weekend is a relatively quiet one at home with us seeing family and friends, although I will see less of my wife who is helping at Youth Club tonight (third Friday in the month) and she is on a safeguarding course tomorrow. Lunch is with our South African friends who barbeque any time of year and whatever the weather (so I will dress accordingly).