For some reason this week has felt a little disjointed and with no main theme running through the week. My meetings this week have included weekly SMT and HR meetings; regular 1:1s (including with Adrian and David D); Head of Profession focused meetings (e.g. Statistical Work Programme with Georgina; new ad hoc statistical releases with Henry Davidson and Nick); 3 x Grade 7 interviews and a GSS HR pre-meeting. I also attended the DASHRAS Stand up to talk about the long-term desk options that are out for consultation across DASD.

Hopefully we are getting more into the swing of the stand ups alternating by site and I am really pleased that Kayla has been doing a great job at getting more meeting rooms for us in recent weeks for not only Stand Ups, but also a number of our other meetings. A summary of this week’s Stand up is at the end of this note.

One change that is coming next week is that I have led a piece of work on behalf of Adrian and the Accommodation & Working Environment Group to have a temporary desk fix following the creation of the two new Units (EEE, led by Alexy & Rachel and DST led by Danielle) since the last desk allocations. This has resulted in significantly more staff (particularly with the Data First project) and these two new Units had no fixed desks / base to call their own. As a result we are recycling a few (seven) desks across DASD given the overall desk total for DASD is unchanged. In JSAS this means giving up two desks – ideally one on each site but because of PNC limitations (in banks of three) I have given up two in 10SC. I and the other Heads of Unit are satisfied this decision is fair across DASD (with every Unit having a fixed desk to staff ratio of approximately 40% and in JSAS it remains slightly higher because of PNC). Whilst it is not ideal for our 10SC base, I am aware that more 10SC based staff seem to visit 102PF than the other way round. It will of course be even more manageable if we can work better on each site across all five working days (for example we are only using 9 desks in 10SC today and that includes both myself and Nick).

Whilst working at home on Wednesday, I watched Prime Minister’s Question Time whilst eating my lunch to see how the new government was shaping up. Personal observations were that these sessions are more like those I remember many years ago – certainly in terms of questions not being answered and I thought a distinct lack of data / numbers in replies. It was also interesting to see the Prime Minister on a loop - I lost track of how many times he put the same pen back in his pocket (unless he had an endless supply of pens).

Following my flu of two week’s ago it has taken me until the middle of this week to start feeling back to normal. As such I am looking forward to another relatively quiet weekend with my regular visit to my elderly aunt and a usual Sunday lunch entertaining the family. As far my aunt goes, we are taking her a new microwave as her current model is over 20 years old! I am definitely keeping a copy of the instruction manual ready at my home for the many phone calls asking for help!
