Let’s start with an apology to Aidan and Georgina. Last Friday, I forgot to include a mention of their Relative Rate Index review published last Thursday (27 February). I commissioned this review last year after I had questions about the methodology and presentation of RRI statistics in the Judicial Appointments Commission and more widely. The review was particularly challenging in handling the breadth of the stakeholder community and in working with some of the key stakeholders. The team  are now looking to present this work at the next GSS Methodology Symposium – which is open to all to present their work and will be based on the theme of “Statistical methodology evolution: a celebration of new and innovative methodology over the years”. It will be held in July at the Kia Oval.

This week the latest quarterly Civil Justice Statistics Quarterly were published on Thursday. We welcome Rita and Francesca who have joined that team in Leeds this week. At the same time, I’d like to pass on my thanks to Harj and the wider team for their work in the intervening period since Tara left. They have all responded to significant pressures to deliver with such a small team.

This week has seen a lot of work and effort from various teams to brief on media stories with Nick’s team and our embedded statistician, Eric, having to turn around briefing quickly for Press Office, the Minister’s Office and No.10. The first example was the Daily Mirror front page on Monday which led with “309 killed in probation scandal”. The story was based on a recent FOI but included some wrong assumptions / interpretations which led to teams looking to correct that in a follow up PQ to the story. Since then, the media have also found data in another older PQ that they are misinterpreting so further handling of that is required in case that blows up over the weekend.

Meanwhile other evidence is being sought for proactive stories on re-offending so don’t be surprised if you shortly read “The adult proven reoffending rate has remained broadly flat over time with latest figures showing a rate of 28.0%. The reoffending rate for adult offenders released from prison sentence of less than 12 months is 62.7%.” and “Reoffending accounts for over three quarters of crimes that result in a caution or sentence.”

I attended the launch meeting of the Government’s new strategy for disability. The meeting was split into two parts – one for policy and one for analysts. This is clearly a big priority for the new Government and I understand it was the first cross department Secretary of State letter sent by the new Prime Minister. This work is bigger and bolder than the Race Disparity Audit because unlike that (which focussed on making data available) this work is expected to drive significant policy changes to help the disabled. I expect that some significant resources will be required on this from both policy and DASD analysts. A number of bi-laterals, including Secretary of State bi-laterals with the Prime Minister, are already being planned.

At my Stand Up this week we focussed on an update from Heads of Profession and a summary is detailed below. At Heads of Profession, and in my Stand Up, we discussed Coronavirus. The situation is changing quickly although the main message is still about personal hygiene (hand washing) and what to do if you show symptoms (e.g. don’t go straight to your doctor or hospital). I am pleased to see the re-emergence of cleaning wipes in both locations and hand sanitiser dispensers are popping up (including in the Canary Wharf shopping areas). One thing we are doing as analysts is building the evidence base for preparations and contingences. For example, last night there was a commission to breakdown the evidence base on elderly prisoners and those that may have underlying health conditions. My work advice to you is to think about business continuity such as teams keeping in touch and thinking about what wold happen if an office closed or some of your colleagues were absent. As a senior management team we are reliant on good communications.

This weekend, we are entertaining tonight and tomorrow (Saturday) we will be spending the day in Woodley, Reading with my eldest daughter and her family. On Sunday, I have a break from my usual Sunday lunch cooking as we are going out for lunch with my parents.