There was no weekly note last week as I had a long weekend away in Somerset and Devon.  I had expected Santa to arrive sedately by boat at the Dartmouth Christmas market, however he turned up speedily and making waves in an RNLI lifeboat. This week’s note covers two weeks and includes a summary of the latest JSAS Stand Up (24 Nov).

Firstly, a note of thanks to those of you who are battling against the disruption caused by the South West trains strike.

Last week, I attended my first Criminal Justice System Demand Group which was two hours of discussion about what the latest metrics produced by DASD meant for the business. To be honest this was a tough one to follow over the phone and as I am still relatively new to so many of the subject areas. The DASD People Board on Wednesday included discussions about the progress of our working Environment and Accommodation group and discussions about a long-term location strategy for DASD.

This week, I returned to work on Tuesday and spent most of the day at the ONS attending an Office of Statistics Regulation workshop for Heads of Profession as part of a review of Statistical Leadership. I also chaired the latest quarterly GSS People Committee meeting (for three hours and it was timed to perfection!) where we had our second-deep dive on recruitment (with a focus on attracting talent).

Last weekend and this week has seen departmental work focussed on the recent London Bridge attacks and the sentencing, rehabilitation and release practices that led to the incident. Obviously, when dealing with small numbers (of current and past terrorist offenders and prisoners) the evidence base is small and a lot of reporting has drawn from unofficial sources. Some of the reporting has been rather emotive and has appeared to have supported various political stances. A problem has involved the various offence groups chosen by different parts of the media as ‘terrorist related’ to show that sentencing is too ‘light’. In that context it is important to remember the offence of endangering life includes letting off fireworks in an unsuitable place and leaving the gas on deliberately – neither of which are usually terror related and are unlikely to lead to long prison sentences. Some media outlets have suggested that our re-offending statistics are not very timely (but we all know that is for an obvious reason). Another dimension is that ‘terrorists’ of foreign nationality will usually be deported and be unable to re-offend (at least in this country). During purdah we are limited in what, if any, further evidence can be put in the public domain so much of the replies from Damon’s and Nick’s teams (and those from PPAS and on MAPPA) have relied on published statistics. 

As I missed the latest Organisation Design workshop (the first I have missed), I had the luxury of my own dedicated session with Adrian, Danielle and Mike on Wednesday. As well as bringing me up to speed with the latest thinking, it gave them the benefit of being able to summarise clearly where we were as a result of last week’s workshop. I had the slightly surreal opportunity of being left in a room on my own to write and post Post-It notes of my own thoughts on the earlier work and to make my own suggestions and comments. We have a further Head of Unit session on this next week.

The closing date for many of our recruitment campaigns is fast approaching and I can confirm that as well as the advertised posts, other posts that are both similar and that are shortly due to become vacant are also likely to be filled from these campaigns and associated merit lists.

Recent JSAS publications have included Civil Justice Statistics (5 December); the delayed Payment by Results Statistics (5 December); the Criminal Justice System Statistics (29 November) and the Race and Criminal Justice Statistics (29 November). I know that each of these were completed in demanding circumstances so well done to three teams who each co-incidentally individually had their Christmas Lunches yesterday.

This weekend my eldest daughter and her family are coming to stay. They have been having a tough time since Freya was born as she sleeps so badly at night. I am sure both mother and father enjoy coming to stay so they can get some sleep during the day. We are also optimistically going as a large group (with my middle daughter and her family and my youngest daughter) to see Father Christmas at Colchester Zoo on Saturday. As a huge IACGMOOH fan, I am also looking forward to the final on Sunday night.