Thank you to the 5 JSAS staff who completed the People Survey yesterday after my reminder in the morning. We have surged from 40 to 45 responses out of a potential pool of 58 of you. CJAS (86%) and FSAS (79%) remain well ahead of our ‘official’ 66% response rate, although I will argue that with only 58 staff in post we can never reach a 100% rate of 68 responses so in my mind we are at 78%. The Survey closes on Monday 4 November.

You can access the survey here and the JSAS survey code is: MOJHQ0794.

This has been a busy publication week with publications in the Prison, Probation and Re-offending arena with six statistical releases published: Offender Management, Safety in Custody, MAPPA, Serious Further Offences, Community performance quarterly, deaths of offenders in the community. Nick Mavron has already circulated a note on this. Talking of publications, we are entering the period of Purdah next week – this is a time of uniqueness for statisticians. Purdah covers the period of campaigning ahead of the election and the Civil Service must remain totally impartial. Whilst government communications are limited and research fieldwork is restricted in the period (usually around 40 days), the publication of statistics goes ahead although guidance from the National Statistician suggests we should not publish on the actual election day any more. If you think about it, those who voted before 09:30 would have a different information base to those who voted after 09:30. Other professions, for example media and journalism also have practices to follow on election day, which is why Exit Polls can not be reported on until after Polling Booths close. Returning to statistics, we can publish in Purdah those statistics pre-announced before Purdah; we can pre-announce statistics in Purdah for publication after Purdah; but we can not pre-announce publications in Purdah for publication in Purdah.

I have had a short week after my long weekend in Reims. Highlights included the DASD People Board where Sarah Morton and myself reported on the work of our Working Environment and Accommodation Group (who meet again next week). We hope to be in a position shortly to tell you what we intend to do about your concerns that you have raised in recent forums. We also had a meeting of the ADR UK – Data First Team. This new team of approx. 18 staff funded by ADR UK includes our own Graham Ison and Kirby King (when she returns next week) as the External Data Linking team. Our meeting included an overview of what had been happening in each workstream for the ADR UK director Emma Gordon (formerly of ONS and HMT). Apparently, I gave her a career chat about 10 years ago! Later today we have the next Organisation Design meeting with Adrian and the SRAs – this time looking at success criteria for DASD.

Nicki Medhurst, recently came across an interview on GOV.uk with the most recent National Statistician, John Pullinger. Interestingly some of the questions and answers look like those we asked when he visited Canary Wharf in the early summer.

https://quarterly.blog.gov.uk/2019/10/30/an-interview-with-john-pullinger-former-uk-national-statistician/

I need to remind you that Civil Service Learning has changed and moved to the new Learning Platform for Government. This site allows links between managers and staff so please action this quickly as your non-registration may be affecting your staff or manager. I would say more, but I am actually in the process of literally creating my own account.

The Judicial Office (JO) are advertising for a Band Bb analyst (GSG or GORS) on level transfer or promotion to provide analytical support for the judiciary. This is an exciting post in a fast evolving and high-profile area, with the opportunity to take ownership of new projects and work collaboratively with the JO and analysts at MoJ. The closing date is Friday 8th November. Matt Walker and I would be grateful if you could promote this opportunity both internally and with colleagues in other departments.  Please contact Linda.Webster@judiciary.uk for more details about the post.

Also in staffing matters there are still a significant number of vacancies in JSAS which we failed to fill through our recent DASD cross-analytical external recruitment. We now have permission to advertise these as specific posts (including two at grade 7 level) and the team leaders are currently drawing up the job descriptions for these posts in JSAS at Band C, Band B and Band Ab levels.

Finally on the work front we wish my diary manager Ilarion Gad every success as he leaves us after today on TCA for a year to work on prison security. It sounds a really exciting opportunity for him and a great opportunity for him to progress his non-analyst career. His replacement is likely to start in mid-November.

This weekend is another family weekend for me visiting my in-laws on Saturday and hosting my own family on Sunday. As someone with limited interest in Rugby (I still don’t understand the rules fully), I am looking forward to a quiet weekly shop in Waitrose early on Saturday morning!