After three four-day weeks, I have survived a return to a five-day week. It feels so much longer!

Monday was the latest DASD Induction day for our latest recruits. I popped along to give presentations on both the statistics profession and on JSAS and then I returned with the other Heads of Unit for the Question and Answer session at the end.

On Tuesday, 10SC was evacuated at 4:15pm. An evacuation is always a good reminder of Business Continuity Plans and the work that Marwan and Amruta are doing on this. Similarly, the Coronavirus is another reminder of the importance of Business Continuity Plans. These are difficult and worrying times, but I think it is important to listen to the facts and to the medical advice and to keep some media reports in perspective (e.g. the Canary Wharf, Chevron story). The main message to reduce spread of germs still seems to be about basic hygiene of regularly washing hands, using and binning tissues, and being careful with regard to coughs and sneezes (protect your mouth).

Another incident this week involved a member of staff and how we identify and track down the nearest First Aider. So much remote working and different working patterns mean that we need to be better at training more First Aiders (and fire wardens) and how we identify them in the workplace is important. In the end, the best source of First Aid information was at the 10SC Printer Point, but with so many other posters and notices there, the list was hard to spot.

Two more heavy duty meetings this week were the DASD Data Board and the Data First Project Board. David Wall presented the recent successful work on reconciling the “Outstanding” cases when comparing HMCTS MI, Crest, Xhibit and Analytical platform data. Some revised coding on the analytical platform ‘Flat File’ to change definitions seems to have made a more consistent DASD and HMCTS dataset. The focus going forward remains on how we best define a single definition of variables and in what cases multiple definitions can exist for different uses and different stakeholders. We also discussed the move away from SAS within a two-year period. At the Data First Project Board, I briefly presented on the External data sharing project and received unsolicited praise for the work of David D, Kirby and Graham, particularly in helping the other teams and projects.

This week, Sarah Morton and I have held two Accommodation and Working Group meetings with our group of volunteers. The first was to take stock on projects and quick wins that volunteers are leading on and the second meeting was to discuss feedback on the options consultation launched at the end of the year. There is lots of valuable feedback we need to consider and act upon before we finalise a set of voting options and voting criteria. Thirdly, Sarah and I met the PCAG accommodation representative to further discuss desk allocations, lockers, cupboards, touchdowns etc. This was purely exploratory and in some cases a reminder of our recent requests.

There have been a number of Head of Profession issues to deal with this week including the use of unpublished information in briefings on the UK’s negotiating stance with the EU; publication of PPAS revisions to a statistical publication; and how to publish delayed PPAS accredited programme analysis (delayed from last summer). I have also been providing advice to the ONS and DWP Heads of Profession about new statistics being published for the first time in the Police Crime Commissioner purdah period and the publication of ad hoc statistics as evidence in court cases respectively.

This has also been a week involving a lot of recruitment issues and I am pleased to say (against strong competition) it looks as if we have also got 3 x new Band D (StOs) to join Nick’s (2) and Carly’s (1) teams. One of these is London based and two will be Leeds based.

This weekend includes my regular visit to my elderly aunt, family time (including Sunday lunch) and possibly a new round of babyproofing our house as the youngest two grandchildren are now on the move (and they love electrical cables).