This week has been a mixed week of calm and urgent requests with potentially more of the latter to come over the weekend.

I guess the most interesting new piece of work for me is the Brexit preparations and, in particular, the ‘No deal’ planning. I was brought up to speed with the emergency analytical work carried out in 2011 and 2012 after the Riots and some of the work done earlier this year before the March deadline was moved. Obviously at times of ‘civil unrest’ the police are in the front line, however, every arrest and charge that they make has a big impact on the whole criminal justice system from remand to the work of Magistrate and Crown Courts and through to the Prisons estate. Not only does the organisation need evidence to base operational decisions on, but so does the Government who additionally require trusted and accurate information in their public handling of any situation. This brings back memories to me as a statistician involved in looking at the impact of the petrol tanker drivers’ strikes, ‘Mad cow disease’, various flu epidemics and the Millennium Bug.

This weekend and next week will see a lot of our statistics in the news as the new PM turns his attention to Crime and Justice with a variety of policy statements and commitments. A number of staff were involved in fact checking a number of statements yesterday and I suspect this will now run until next Tuesday or Wednesday. From what I have initially seen a number of newspaper articles over the last few years have generated ‘soundbites’ and stories that are out of date, incorrect or misleading and we need to trace the official source (if we can) and the authority of those figures. In addition, there are the regularly used departmental soundbites that need checking or updating. This can all be very time consuming, however the deadlines can be challenging (e.g. “can you check this [statement] in the next few minutes?”).

In staffing news, the advert for TCA cover to Grade 6 to cover Bridgette’s departure for a minimum period of September to December 2019 has gone live. In addition, the cross analytical function adverts for Band Ab (Grade 7), Band B and Band C all remain live on CJS Jobs. As I explained at my Stand Up, these recruitments will hopefully generate a pool of successful candidates across professions to allocate across DASD teams including JSAS from October. I do take Dan’s point about the continued importance of one-post promotions where applicants are applying for a single job that they are really interested in and I will ensure that such opportunities remain available. There will also continue to be managed move opportunities on level transfer in due course. Hot off the press today are a Band B and a Band C roles working for David Dawson on the ADR UK project that you have heard so much about recently.

A big plug for Matt Walker and his new book – Europe United. I was lucky enough to be at the book launch on Tuesday night to hear about his career break and how he used it to visit football matches in 55 different countries. I particularly enjoyed his live Football Focus interview earlier in the year and the map of his travels. He has one talk arranged in 10SC for lunchtime on Tuesday 13 August and will be arranging more for 102PF. You can briefly read about Matt on the Intranet (https://intranet.justice.gov.uk/blog/no-ordinary-career-break-i-watched-football-in-55-nations-and-became-a-published-author/. Matt is an excellent speaker so do go along and hear in him in person (at one of his events) and to see his amazing photos.

This weekend will see me assembling (onto a new stand) a new television for my 84-year-old parents. I think it will be bigger than they expect. I will also need to show them how to use all the on-line material (e.g. BBC i-Player) they have never used. We are also having a meal out with my wife’s Mother and eldest sister. Hopefully, any urgent phone calls will be kept to a minimum but I hope to have back up from Damon, Nick and David for which I am really grateful. 