Let’s start with a big THANK YOU to the 33 JSAS staff who have completed the People Survey so far. That is more than half our staff to date. For the rest of you, I encourage you to complete it soon - please. The JSAS denominator has been revised down from 89 to 68 although we typically have less than 60 staff in post for any day during this month.
You can access the survey here and the JSAS survey code is: MOJHQ0794.

This week has included reminders to me of how fortunate my family is and how our difficulties are so minor compared to other peoples’ complicated lives. 

On Monday night I chaired the meeting of the AGM of our local Child Contact Centre (as part of my MoJ supported volunteering role). There are only four Contact Centres left in Essex now partly through funding cuts, largely through increased bureaucracy and partly through lack of volunteers. Changes to the Justice System and associated provision have also led to significant challenges to families needing support too. As well as hearing about the difficult situations that many of our Contact Centre families are in, we also heard about fostering and the terrible lives some children suffer in terms of abuse before ‘escaping’ to safety.

On Tuesday, my views of society were again broadened through my visit with Carly, Harj, Emma and Matteo to the Clerkenwell & Shoreditch County Court. To be honest, the day couldn’t have been scripted. Most of the cases we saw revolved around housing and evictions. Cases included hearings to stop evictions the next day; hearings to allow evicted tenants to return to their homes; and hearings to resolve joint tenancies where relationship had broken down resulting in non-contact molestation orders. In many cases rent arrears were £5k-£10K and many of the situations involved children in some way or another. Cases included legal representation that failed to appear; defendants who failed to appear; legal representatives who did not know the case and had not read the papers; a translator who couldn’t translate; a very emotionally distressed prisoner; an eviction whilst the tenant was in hospital in France; hearings to appeal against evictions literally hours away; and a harassment case of a tenant harassing a housing officer.
In other news this week, work on organisational design (OD) continues with emphasis on Prioritisation, Working Environment and Accommodation (WEA) and preparing to consult our senior stakeholders. Within my working group (WEA) we are finalising a list of quick wins and looking at further accommodation ideas and options to address the feedback from staff. These will be presented more widely in due course.

On the work front, we have published the latest Knife and Offensive Weapon Sentencing quarterly publication. As announced in the previous publication, this was delayed to allow the PNC upgrade. Particular credit goes to the DIAL team given their significant staffing, PQ and PNC challenges in recent months.

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/knife-and-offensive-weapon-sentencing-statistics-april-to-june-2019

In other news this week, the DASD Data Board focussed on GDPR and Dissemination, with particular thanks to David Dawson and Phil Hall for their input. The DASD Board included a discussion on the use of SAS led by JSAS’s Damon Wingfield where we agreed that some scoping work for the implications of moving from SAS would be developed and considered by the Data Board.

Meanwhile staffing and resourcing issues continue to take up a lot of my time as we consider options for filling posts and at times we have been disappointed by successful candidates choosing other options to MoJ or in one case being wrongly allocated to us by the GSS. To that end, my offer last week to consider employing Temporary Statistical Officers remains. if you know of anyone suitable (e.g. with some statistical content in a numerate degree at 2:2 level or above) then I will consider their CVs.

This weekend, Heather and I are heading to Reims, in France, with four other couples to visit amongst other attractions the Champagne Houses. We are travelling via Eurotunnel in three cars and I have the luxury of not driving. The only downside is the early start on Friday – being picked up at 05:20. I will be back at work on Wednesday.