I must say I could get the hang of regular four-day weeks, this being my third in a row, although they do come with consequences. After having had both Friday and Monday off last weekend, I returned to the office to 8 meetings on Tuesday and a backlog of emails to fit in around those meetings. Thankfully there were less meetings for the rest of the week, largely being a consequence of it being half-term.

Highlights of the week have included the publication of the Criminal Justice System Statistics despite so many distractions (e.g. PQs and ad hoc requests from media and Home Office) and staffing resource pressures. Further good news came to me from David Wall and Ivy who explained to me that we have resolved the discrepancies in “Outstanding cases” in the criminal courts data so that the DASHRAS and FSAS (flat-file based estimates) have now come into line with our own JSAS estimates and those of HMCTS following coding revisions by Karik & Co.

It is also reassuring that last week’s Mortgage and Landlord possession statistics have not drawn the same attention as previous quarter’s now that the data has reverted to more normal levels. However, decisions from the ICO are still awaited on our refusal to name to the individual Bank that drove the change in the level of the repossession timeseries from 2015 to 2019.

We are finalising the allocations of the recent recruitments and the last pieces of the jigsaw are almost in place although this doesn’t fill all our vacancies. In particular, the latest GSS central allocation to departments and within departments is being finalised. Mark’s and Elliott’s moves to their new teams have been agreed. Meanwhile Carly is preparing for the new Grade 7 (Rita) and SStO (Francesca) arriving in Leeds and Ross with be joining the PNC team from MoD (replacing Craig).

We had a Business Continuity Call tree test the other week and I’d like to thank Amruta and Marwan for taking this forward including providing me with a report of outcomes. After the initial questions from our Grade 6s asking whether I was really initiating a test or giving them advanced notice of a ‘surprise’ test, it worked. The biggest error was mine in mistyping Chandni’s phone number (with one wrong digit) – I have no idea who received the text message instead. We have agreed that as well as having a formal list of all staff, local arrangements can additionally apply (e.g. team What’s App groups). Marwan and Amruta are now supplementing our continuity plans and I am keen to raise awareness with you all about muster points; contacting stakeholders in an emergency; the use of the staff information line; and how teams communicate and work if all office bases are out of action.

I want to give you another reminder to complete the Analysis Function Diversity and Inclusion Survey: https://www.smartsurvey.co.uk/s/XFBPN/ . As previously mentioned, it is disappointing that so few GSS members completed this survey last year (31%). I am also looking forward to hearing from our teams who are looking at our own People Survey results so we can start putting the improvements you want into place. 

This weekend I am hoping for a quiet time and to finally shake off a cold that has been affecting me on and off for many weeks. A quiet weekend includes my regular early Saturday morning trip to Billericay High Street, an evening meal with my parents on Saturday and me cooking the usual Sunday roast. If it was warmer I would be tempted to start some gardening jobs for the year, but that might have to wait.
