This week we completed the interviewing for the external recruitment for GSS Grade 7 posts and we hope the results will be posted early next week. Thanks to Liz for being my interview panel member. The HStO and SStO interviews are early next week – thanks to Rob, Sarah and Lucy Cuppleditch for volunteering to interview. In addition, we are finalising the DASD managed moves although there was some surprise at how few applications there were given the number of posts on offer. On the positive side, this will give some stability to some teams as we work through challenging times which include the PNC upgrade, delays to some of our publications and high expectations of other publications, particularly as we approach 2-years post Lammy Review. Speaking of Lammy, I had an interesting chat with Amber Isaac our statistician lead in the Sentencing Council who is working on analysis to investigate disproportionality in sentencing to be published in November. There are interesting handling issues around this publication which is not strictly an official statistic.
 
I have also had a few initial meetings on various topics. My debrief from my meeting with Jerome Glass was covered in Stand Up (and below). I also had meetings on the Security theme of Data First and a meeting to discuss the programme management of Data First. Data First is the new name for the ADR UK project. I also met Toby Hayward-Butcher one of the new leads in the Data Strategy Team. Lucy Cuppleditch and I discussed scaling back the Offender Equalities publication given staff shortages. Regular meetings also continued including the weekly SMT (which discussed reward & recognition awards for Quarter 2), the latest Accommodation and Working Conditions Working Group meetings and various other bi-laterals and management 1:1s. Throughout this week there have also been a number of bubbling issues including handling of FOIs on probate and the continued mortgage repossession debate.
 
Finally, I am looking forward to a long weekend (including Monday) which includes tickets to see West Han v Crystal Palace (on Saturday evening). I also have a statistician’s golfing overnighter with Steve Ellerd-Elliott (DWP), Shaun Smith (HMCTS), Chris McKee (DTp), Jack Cooper (HO) and Eliot Beevor (HO) at the Tudor Park Golf and Country Club hotel near Maidstone.