Headline news – I have reached my three-month milestone, since joining the department. I have really enjoyed the new challenges and working with you. The only downside, is feeling there is so much more to learn given the breadth of JSAS’s work areas.

This week started with my mandatory Wellbeing Training for the SCS. This is ‘cascade’ training from an SCS event earlier in the year. My session of six people was a mixture of new-joiners and those who could not attend the SCS event. We learnt about the PERMA model and were given materials to cascade and to think about will our teams. PERMA is about 5 themes: Positive Emotion; Engagement; Relationships; Meaning; and Accomplishments. Having had Mandy Rutter’s resilience training recently within JSAS at our recent Awayday this may be a little less pressing for us, but I will discuss with the SMT what and when to roll this out in teams or in a Unit event.

This week also saw the welcome return of Induction training within DASD. I spoke twice as both the Head of Profession and as the Head of Unit, but I was also there for my own induction. Although there was only a short overview of each area it was very informative and the afternoon was rounded off with a Q&A session with Adrian. A small group of us then retired to the local Wetherspoons where it was nice to know some of the recent joiners in other Units. A similar presentation to the one that I gave at the event can be read in the latest PCAG Newsletter (which was due out this week, but I haven’t seen it yet).

I also met Nicki to discuss staffing and finances in the context of which vacancies we can afford to fill in JSAS and through which means. A number of generic Band A to Band C analyst adverts (including statisticians) have gone live this week on CS jobs. We have not been prescriptive about what posts are on offer, but we have used some examples of recently filled jobs. Please don’t panic if you see your own  job – it is only an example. The recruitments will be held in parallel across professions within DASD and we will look to best fit the successful candidates to vacancies. I am also drafting an Expression of Interest for a Grade 6 / Grade 7 TCA to cover Bridgette’s post (at least from September to December 2019 as a minimum). Later, there will also be a Grade 6 / Grade 7 TCA to cover Liz’s Maternity Leave (from October ’19 for a year). 

Finally, a big thank you to Chris Hodgson and the DASD team of volunteers who so effectively arranged Sports Day yesterday. A big thank you to all the JSAS competitors and also to our supporters – it is nice to see such a supportive and inclusive team. I think I have made a friend for life with Aiden – so much so that he wouldn’t let go of my hand in the Hoop race, but maybe that bonding helped us when we really got some rhythm going in the three-legged race! Tips for next year include choose the shape of your lime carefully; don’t bother thinking about the heights of your pass the ball team; and decide whether to wear shoes or not in the sack race. As the oldest competitor I was pleased to have taken part in every event – thanks for putting up with me, team! I suspect there may be some interesting photos circulating today. 