I am writing this week travelling home on a train from Leeds tethered to my mobile hotspot. I should not tempt fate, but flexible working really can work!                                                                                                                                                   Yesterday I spent much of the day with our analysts in 5 Wellington Place, Leeds where there is a small team of FSAS staff plus Tony Childs the HMCTS Grade 7 statistician. Thanks to them for making me feel so much at home. We had lunch together and then they presented their work to me and I told them a bit about what the JSAS teams do. I then had a telephone meeting with Sarah Blake about Brexit contingency data collections. It was good to see (and explore) the Leeds site given it is an option for a longer-term analytical hub for DASD. Inside, the building reminded me of 10SC, but it is currently a lot less occupied. Outside there are lots of food and drink options for both lunch and the evenings as this is clearly an area being regenerated. Interestingly MoJ can now longer afford the Premier Inn, however the Novotel next door was excellent in terms of both accommodation and breakfast (including an option of help yourself prosecco which I sensibly declined given the day ahead).

Today, I visited Leeds prison with the FSAS contract teams. It was a real eye opener in many ways not least in how government contracts and rules (from HMT) provide so many practical barriers and actually increase costs despite trying to reduce them. Leeds is a Category B prison, one level below that which holds the most serious prisoners. We met both the Governor and the Deputy Governor and were given a pretty full tour. Interestingly, the Permanent Secretary was also visiting later today and the Prime Minister visited a few weeks ago. I was surprised at how freely we were allowed to access the wings although it was a bit more nerve wracking when we were in the segregation section where the recently misbehaving prisoners were put for solitary confinement as punishment. It was interesting to hear that the catering manager has to feed every prisoner 3 meals a day for only £2.02 per head. I asked about their Brexit contingencies for food.

I have already emailed you about Business Continuity this week and my thanks go to Damon for attending the BCP test (desk exercise on Thursday). Nick deputised for me at the joint Home Office / MoJ analytical SCS event on Thursday. I look forward to hearing more about these.

Another focus for me this week has been the Working Environment and cross site Working evolving evidence from various sources.

Finally a reminder as we approach the end of September, please think about staff, colleague and manager reward and recognition nominations for the month (vouchers) and quarter (cash).

On a personal front this weekend may perhaps be the last ‘quiet’ weekend before Christmas (did I say the c word?) because according to the calendar at home there is lots of entertaining, visiting and weekends away coming up.