I will keep this week’s note short given we only had our Stand Up yesterday (and those speaking notes are included below). To address popular demand we will be holding these stand ups more on a face to face basis across the two sites (although arranging the meeting rooms will be easier in 10SC).

So the General election is over and with a returning Government who now have a big majority we can expect a demanding set of Ministers who want to make a difference at pace following a difficult period. Obviously, the Cabinet will be appointed today (including our Secretary of State) and over the weekend the rest of the Ministerial team will be appointed. They will receive First Day and early briefings on a number of subjects (which should have been fact checked already) however more fact checking will be required for the Queen’s Speech expected later next week. We can expect recent events such as the London Bridge attack to shape some of those commitments.

We have had a difficult few weeks with our data for our publications published today on Family Court Statistics and Criminal Court Statistics. We seem to be uncovering more and more data issues as the HMCTS modernisation continues at pace. The main issues are around discontinuities where we need to understand real changes compared to system changes. This also involves us updating our code and methodologies as new variables are created and old variables deleted on the source systems. All credit to our teams for keeping cool heads in demanding circumstances. Tribunal statistics were also published today.

Earlier this week Sarah Morton circulated an update from the Working Conditions & Accommodation Working Group. I hope you feel we are moving in the right direction, but we have to admit somethings are outside of our control. It was interesting to hear from the Chief Statistician in Home Office earlier this week say that their desk to staff ratios are deteriorating significantly (and they were not great when I left in the spring). Whilst none of you were in the room, I know many dialled in to Adrian’s repeat presentation to DASD of his ExCo presentation. This should be available on video if you missed it. I know that Adrian is keen that staff understand and engage with our DASD direction of travel and offer to ExCo and he is keen to have feedback on this.

I hope that those of you who have had your Grade 6 team Christmas lunches so far have enjoyed them. Please remember that we are hoping that as many of you as possible can come to our JSAS team event on Thursday afternoon in 10SC. Please don’t forget to give Iwan Jones a copy of you baby photo early next week. I know that Georgina and the JSAS social committee put a lot of work into these types of events so please come and enjoy.

This weekend is another one that chimes with one of Sir Ian Diamond’s thoughts below as my wife and I support our dependent elderly relatives and support our own children (with their children) n the run up to Christmas.
