Well the starting gun has finally been fired and all national interest is turning to a General Election. For those new to the Civil Service this is a strange time and it can be even stranger for statisticians as I mentioned last week. The official guidance for Civil Servants has now been issued (with a whole section on statistics - pages 29-32). It appears to have been rushed out so quickly that the internal hyperlinks don’t work. I suggest that you all read section K as a minimum, but as a civil servant and depending on your own political interests and activities you should be aware of the content of the wider document

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/election-guidance-for-civil-servants

The main change for our teams is how we handle Pre-Release Access in the coming weeks – most notably the withdrawal of face to face briefing despite the contingency for PRA to continue. We anticipate that the basic submission and published outputs are sent as usual, however there will be no briefing meeting and therefore no requirement to produce material for that meeting. However, with that in mind you might like to review the content of your submissions more closely to ensure all the messages are clear and can be understood easily.

In addition, there is the National Statistician’s own guidance on publishing on and around Polling Days.

https://gss.civilservice.gov.uk/policy-store/gss-policy-on-publishing-official-statistics-on-polling-days/

Whilst much of this is straight forward such as not publishing on Polling Day it does raise the interesting conflict at the end which says:

10. By moving to a blanket delay there is a risk that departments might give pre-release access to individuals on polling day, and a public breach of such access could have an impact on the poll. 
11. By law this is at the discretion of the ‘person responsible’. The new policy includes advice from the National Statistician that there should be no pre-release access to statistics published close to a polling day. 

We have some new material being published on 13 December which requires wider briefing not only within the department but with the Home Office. Whilst it is unlikely we will have Ministers in post that day (or until the evening) the department could have to respond to findings in those statistics in the meantime so PRA is important, but comes with a risk.

You might also like to read a recent article from Hiten Shah Executive Director of the Royal Statistical Society of why Purdah guidance should be reformed.

https://www.civilserviceworld.com/articles/opinion/hetan-shah-why-election-showed-purdah-rules-need-be-reformed

As many of you know I suggest that the stats teams regularly keep an eye both on UKSA correspondence and Full Fact (to keep an eye out for future pitfalls that could affect us). Of course, these days other fact checking organisations are available! There has been some interesting fact checking going on in recent weeks with regard to the electioneering if you have the time or inclination to read some of them (and extracts are often in the Evening Standard).

https://fullfact.org/

I also wanted to spend a little time talking about staffing and the pressures you are under with so many vacancies. The good news is that we hope to advertise 8 posts next week and hopefully we can fill these Band Ab, Band B and Band C posts as early as January. With regard to Band D posts, history suggests that level transfers between departments at StO (Band D) rarely attract applications (for a number of reasons) and the GSS central recruitment can never generate enough allocations which is why I want to focus on recruiting some TStOs and Sandwich Students.

Also at these times of change and urgent need we sometimes must make some very quick business need decisions for example in asking for staff to temporarily help other teams or by offering very short periods of temporary promotion within teams.  In the Civil, Administrative and Justice area we currently have a number of significant data challenges including the content of next Thursday’s release; and where we have recently suspended data on both judge sitting days and probate that urgently need resolving. Thank you for your co-operation and understanding when we take such decisions within and across teams.

Finally, a big thank you to the 52 JSAS staff who completed the People Survey which closed on Monday. With only around 60 staff in post, that is a good response. The Unit results will be available in the New Year.

The Blunt family weekend looks very familiar to those who have read my recent weekly notes including monthly fish ’n’ chips with my parents tonight; visiting my elderly aunt with her monthly supply of oven meals; and a routine Sunday roast cooked, as usual, by me. My wife is also cooking her first vegan meal for visitors tomorrow which includes serving vegan wine (until recently I hadn’t realised vegan wine was produced differently). Finally, my youngest daughter is 25 today – where has that time gone?