Despite this being the holiday season, this seems to have been one of my busiest weeks here (as in the least control of my own time).

The middle of the week focussed on the publication of the status of the 10 Prisons Project and involved a story in the Telegraph before Pre-Release Access; discussion of the content of the publication during the PRA period; and the use of MI data by the Charity inquest in commenting on the deaths in custody. I will not go into more detail here other than to say that these issues were all about the dealing with the unexpected in the role of a Head of Profession.

As well as the already commissioned Sentencing Review, requiring data and analysis at pace, the new work commissioned this week by the PM and No.10 involves turning the clock back and returning to a central government target culture. Discussions with Cabinet Office need to be completed by the end of next week on possible targets for the Criminal Justice System (e.g. public confidence in the CJS and metrics to measure improved performance).

This week has also seen me discuss with Aidan’s team our review of Relative Rate Indices. If these are used in any of your publications, please ensure that Aidan knows.
I am in the process of having my first Touch Point meetings with all my Grade 6s (three down, two to go) now that I am familiar with the process – it is all very different to Home Office who had monthly coaching meetings and formal mid-year and end-year reports.

I also met with the StO/HStO/SStO/As Group to discuss what they can do to help me as a Head of Profession and how they can help me to build a more integrated GSS community across DASD and with embedded statisticians.

We are also continuing to discuss contingency arrangements around Brexit and in particular data feeds associated with the possibility of any civil unrest and its impact on the Criminal Justice System.

You will have seen Adrian has now circulated the Organisational Change Diagnostic Report which summarises where we are as an organisation building on the 100+ interviews with DASD staff across the whole Directorate as all grades. I do encourage you all to read this slide pack. Sarah Morton and I will be leading the work the address the recommendation “Form a working group to tackle the co-location and work/life balance issues highlighted in this report. Identify two SRAs to be accountable for this workstream”. This is one of the five main recommendations. This will build on the earlier work that decided how teams would be organised across sites and the work led by Tina and Lucy on a protocol for ways of working. There are obviously fixed constraints that we can’t control but we need to be creative and positive within those constraints. We will be seeking volunteers so this work can start at pace next month.

Today is my 33rd Wedding Anniversary. However, with such a busy time at home entertaining my daughters and grandchildren, neither my wife nor I have had the time to even write a card to each other. Hopefully, we can have a well-earned rest in Madeira next week. The only downside is that our flight is at 05:50 on Monday morning so it will be a very early start – leaving home around 3am!