An early note this week as I have a four-day week this week.

This week has seen a lot of time spent on Organisational Design. On Monday the senior managers’ latest half day session focussed on the Voice of the Partner and the sessions we intend to have with Director Generals and their Directors to explain our DASD direction of travel and to see if it aligns to their needs going forward. We are also still focusing on the themes of Data & automation; Dissemination; Cross government social policy; Personalisation; Efficiency & effectiveness; and What works; to document where we are and where we want to be. This visionary work is closely linked with the work a new small group of us are focussing on to look at the Criminal Court data and how that is being modernised and automated using the Analytical Platform against a back drop of every changing systems in HMCTS as they move to their own new Common Platform.

Our own JSAS senior management team had our latest quarterly strategic meeting which started as usual with some team building fun. This time it was Electric Shuffleboard where I got to see who my most competitive deputies were. Without telling tales, I can instead report that champion on the day was Carly (with 6 wins) and weakest link on the day was myself (only 2 wins). In our subsequent team meeting, we discussed Business Planning for 2020/21; staffing challenges with regard to structures and the filling of our posts; the next JSAS event and handling of PQs within JSAS and with our partners. After a lot of research and negotiation we think we have finally found a venue for the next JSAS event. This will now be on the afternoon of Thursday 12 March (which avoids an event on a Friday or a 9am start) so please put a placeholder in your diary before Matthew and Nick fit the details. We would like to start with some sort of lunchtime social event so please plan for this too.

This week’s Stand Up was effectively a guest stand up with three visitor slots. You don’t have one visitor for ages and then three come along together. Firstly, Joe Blance reminded us how to book training and the annual deadline for mandatory training before going on to give us a sneaky preview of the new DASD learning platform. Then Ellen Cookson told us about the survey to inform the DASD People and Culture Group’s work on our barriers to learning. Finally we heard from Paul Donnelly who told us about Data Strategy Team (DST) who are our new neighbours occupying the two desks that we gave up in 10SC. Let’s make sure we talk to them whenever they are there – David Wall’s team may have a head start in this area in terms of knowing some of them. Joe will be circulating his slides and Ellen will be circulating the survey link which will be non-identifiable so please give your honest views.

This weekend starts early as tomorrow I will be taking my Mum out for her Christmas present to see Anton & Erin at the Cliff’s Pavilion Southend. This type of treat for her usually starts with a takeaway fish ‘n’ chips lunch and then a Rossi ice cream on the seafront before the show. For the rest of the weekend we will be mainly preparing for a busy weekend next weekend.
