A short week for me as I have annual leave on Friday.

This week started with me cascading to the analytical community what was required from analysts and policy to deliver a new Disability Strategy by the winter. That involved me sending a request for analysts to review the Rapid Evidence Assessment of disability in the justice area and establishing policy contacts.

On Tuesday I gave evidence as part of a former colleague’s Deep Vetting (DV) application so they could work in Counter Terrorism in the Home Office. I was also briefed on the latest data discrepancies faced by David Wall’s team with their next publication only two weeks away. The challenge is associated with the HMCTS MI data apparently diverging from our National Statistics for one key measure. I also attended a meeting between the Office of Statistics Regulation and the Sentencing Council to discuss the voluntary application of the Code of Practice for sentencing guidelines. The day ended with my latest 1:1 with Adrian.

Wednesday was a quieter day as 3 hours were unexpectedly freed up when the latest Organisation Design workshop was cancelled due to sickness.  I was able to focus on the 360-degree feedback for a few of my SCS colleagues. I also had a meeting with policy leads to discuss the work required for the Disability Strategy.

On Thursday we published the latest Tribunal Statistics and the Knife Possession Statistics. Thanks to both of those teams with a special mention to Matteo who led the Tribunals Pre-Release briefing whilst Harj was taking part in a learning and development opportunity by working in Private Office for a week.

Other meetings this week included routine / regular 1:1 catch ups; our weekly JSAS Senior Management team meeting; and the weekly DASD HR meeting.

I hope you found Adrian’s note on Tuesday about the Coronavirus useful. As individuals we are all significantly affected and worried about the uncertainties faced in the coming months. I can honestly say I have not been panic buying and I think it is sad that people don’t see the knock-on effect of panic buying to the elderly, frail and those who can only afford to shop for essentials daily. I am hearing more and more of your stories about holidays being cancelled and family members being unable to attend family events. With my own four very close family members aged over 84, I am of course worried about the risks to them. My parents cancelled coming out for a meal with us last weekend to reduce their exposure risk. Having also been the father of a 12-year old daughter on cancer treatment I am as conscious as anyone of the risks to vulnerable groups and those with underlying health conditions. However, I am also a great believer in following medical advice, which got us through our family’s 9 months of cancer treatment and beyond. As such I am washing my hands more regularly and more thoroughly and I am more conscious of the space and people around me when travelling. I am also trying to keep the statistics about the virus in perspective.

This weekend I am on annual leave on Friday and going to a meeting with my Mother-in-law to discuss her finances and her will. Honestly, this meeting was arranged before Coronavirus was even heard of as a risk. At the weekend, my wife is at a conference on Saturday and we have a birthday celebration roast dinner at home on Sunday for my both my middle daughter and her husband (both 28). We also have friends round for afternoon tea on Sunday – they don’t know it yet but I want their help moving furniture ready for a new carpet in our lounge and study on Monday.
