Firstly, I would like to acknowledge the work on PQs over the last week or so. A number of teams have been literally inundated with these at a particularly challenging time when they are either focussing on publications or have significant staff absences. Thank you to all of those involved and to those in other teams for offering to help out or for being sympathetic.

This week’s meetings included my first 1:1 with Sir Ian Diamond the National Statistician. I have seen him speak at meetings such as the Heads of Profession meetings, but this was a first 1:1 for me with him. Of particular note, was his interest in Data Sharing and the difficulties of assessing what works with regard to re-offending. In addition, I sounded him out about pausing publications to create space to resolve some of the modernisation issues around the Analytical and Common Platforms. I was particularly conscious of my time with Sir Ian on Monday evening as our meeting didn’t start until 5:15pm and I had to be back in Billericay to chair the latest Management committee meeting of our Child Contact centre at 8pm.

I also met the YJB statistics team to discuss new experimental statistics from their new Asset Plus data source and met the statistics lead in the Sentencing Council as they are seeking my approval, and that of the Statistics Authority / Office of Statistics Regulation, for support of their plans for the coming year.

We have had further meetings on plans for transferring criminal court data to the Common and Analytical platform and to resolve emerging discontinuities. The Data and Analysis Board on Tuesday focussed on prioritisation and how we could develop an analytical tool to prioritise our precious DASD resources. On Wednesday the Band A meeting focussed on a number of topics from fully accessible statistical products to our Quality Assurance rotas and from standardising our practices to   publishing Quality Statements to meet compliance with the Code.  I chaired the quarterly GSS People Board on Wednesday which focussed on an assessment of the maturity of the GSS as a profession. Other meetings were mainly focussed around regular 1:1 catch-ups and weekly management meetings.

On staffing, the new recruits jigsaw is finally coming together and the three new grade 7s to lead and join our teams are Dan Hawksworth, Dan Heap and Rita Kumi-Ampofo who will join Nick’s, Damon’s and Carly’s teams respectively. There are still issues to resolve around recent Band B and Band C recruitments and where staff are allocated. One of the significant changes will be our first two JSAS staff starting in Leeds (Rita and Francesca Bryden (Band B)) which aligns with our DASD vision for increasing our Leeds presence and offering posts there. 

I am on annual leave tomorrow which includes a Valentine’s Day dinner party that we are hosting in the evening. We have my eldest daughter and family to stay at the weekend (arriving mid-morning on Saturday) which means a house full for my Sunday roast (8 adults and four small children). I am also on annual leave on Monday which will probably be a day out with my wife but where we go depends on the weather.
