 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 	 
 
Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 Lancashire 
 
 
 
 

  
 
Contents  
 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	Page Number 
 
Contents 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	2 
Glossary 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	3 
Introduction 	 5 
Structure and Governance  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	8  
Resources and Value for Money  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	9  
Partnership Arrangements  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	13 
Risks to Future Delivery against the three outcome measures 	 	 	 	 	 	 	16 
Risks to Future Service Delivery  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	19 
Supporting Youth Justice Action Plan  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	20 
• Resourcing and workforce development 
• Reducing First Time Entrants 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
• Reducing Re-Offending    	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
• Reducing the Use of Custody  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
• Cross Cutting Desired Outcomes  
Appendix 1 - Shared Vision for Children's Services  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	27 
Appendix 2 - LCC Corporate Structure and Children's Services and Education Structure 	 	 	28 
Appendix 3 - Youth Offending Team Structure  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	30 
Appendix 4 - Budget and Staffing Tables  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	31 
Appendix 5 - Lancashire YOT - Learning and Development Plan 2019/20  	 	 	 	 	34 
Appendix 6 - Child and Family Feedback 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
 
AQA Assessment and Qualifications Alliance LSCB Lancashire Safeguarding Children Board ASB Anti Social Behaviour  LYJMB Lancashire Youth Justice Management Board ASDAN Award Scheme Development and Accreditation Network MAPPA     Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements AssetPlus/Asset YJB National assessment tool  NI National Indicators ASYE Assessed and Supported Year in Employment  NS National Standards CAF  Common Assessment Framework PCC Police and Crime Commissioner CAMHS  Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service QA Quality Assurance CAT Communication Awareness Tool RAG Red Amber Green CHAT Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool RJ Restorative Justice CJS  Criminal Justice System ROSH Risk of Serious Harm CLA Children Looked After SAVRY Structured Assessment of Violence in Youth CLR Critical Learning Review SCIP Service Continuous Improvement Plan CPS Crown Prosecution Service SCR Serious Case Review CSC Children's Social Care SEND Special Educational Needs and Disability CFW Children and Families Wellbeing Service SLA Service Level Agreement ETE  Education, Training or Employment   TFU Troubled Families Unit ECT Effective Communication Tool  YDA Youth Detention Accommodation  HMIP Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation WPEH Well-Being, Prevention and Early Help IOM Integrated Offender Management YJB  Youth Justice Board IRS Integrated Resettlement Service YJMB  Youth Justice Management Board  ISS Intensive Supervision and Surveillance  YJILS Youth Justice Interactive Learning Space JAC Junior Attendance Centre  YOT  Youth Offending Team LA Local Authority YRO Youth Rehabilitation Order LCC  Lancashire County Council LYOT Lancashire Youth Offending Team LCJB  Lancashire Criminal Justice Board LSCB Lancashire Safeguarding Children Board LYOT Lancashire Youth Offending Team    
 
Key to Lead Initials 
 
Name Title Barbara Bath (BB) Head of Youth Justice, Fostering, Adoption and Residential Services Carolyn Entwistle (CE) Youth Justice Senior Manager Hannah Blower (HB) Youth Justice Team Manager Maria Lewis (ML) Youth Justice Team Manager Deborah Howarth (DH)  Business Support Manager Senior Management Team (SMT) Senior Management Team Team Managers (TMs) Team Managers Practice Managers (PMs) Practice Managers Martha Bell (MB) Practice Manager  Rebecca Fisher (RF) Practice Manager Louise Smith (LS) Practice Manager Colin Clements (CC) Practice Manager Dan Jefferson (DJ) Practice Manager Becky Stirzaker (BS) Advanced Practitioner Kirsty Elliott (KE) ETE Lead Julie Cross (JC) Health Lead Lisa Williams Performance, Development and Research Officer (PDRO) Lucy Bailey Business Support Team Leader BIT  Business Intelligence Team IG Team Information Governance   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Lancashire is one of the largest Youth Offending Teams (YOT) in the country and is part of Lancashire County Council's (LCC) Directorate for Children's Services.  LCC is the fourth largest council in the UK covering an area of 2,903 sq. km. and serving a population of 1.2 million. With 12 district councils, 6 clinical commissioning groups and 4 hospital trusts within the boundaries plus two neighbouring unitary authorities, there is a high demand for partnership working.  
 
The county has 476 primary schools, 62 secondary, 30 special schools, 10 short stay schools, 51 children's centres and 28 academies serving 171,830 children. Of these there is a varied mix of state, faith, free schools and academies. 
 
Lancashire YOT's (LYOT) primary function is to: 
 
• Prevent offending 
• Reduce re-offending and harm 
• Reduce the number of Children entering custody 
• Increase victim and public confidence 
 
LYOT's governance arrangements is through Lancashire's Youth Justice Management Board (YJMB), the new chair of the YJMB (February 2019) is Stephen Young, Executive Director of Growth, Environment, Transport and Community Services, for LCC.   
The cohort of children within youth justice services continue to present with complex needs and challenging behaviour.  In October 
2017 LYOT undertook a Youth Justice Peer Review, the focus was on governance and operational effectiveness and all recommendations have been implemented in 2018-19.  LYOT restructured in July 2018 to align with proposed budgets and service needs.  Roles and responsibilities of practitioners were reviewed and revised to ensure continuity of priority service delivery.  LYOT is included in LCC Property Strategy, the number of YOT buildings are reducing and staff are being co-located with other children's services, this will be continually reviewed.      
 
On 29th March 2019 HM Inspectorate of Probation announced a joint inspection of youth justice services in Lancashire, the final report is expected in August 2019, an Improvement Plan will be developed to monitor progress in addressing the report's recommendations. 
 
LYOT's vision has recently been revised after consultation with staff and children known to the service, it is aligned to Lancashire County County's shared vision for children's services 'Children, young people and families in need of help are safe, healthy and supported to achieve'.  
 
 
 
Lancashire Youth Offending Team's Vision, Mission, Values and Safeguarding pledges to children. 
 
Our Vision (What we want to achieve)  
To create safer communities in Lancashire by working with children, their families and victims to achieve positive outcomes and prevent offending behaviour. 
 
Our Mission (How will we achieve the vision)  
Lancashire Youth Offending Team will deliver a quality service and work effectively in partnership with all other relevant services to help children reach their potential.  
 
Our Values We will: 
• Listen to the voice of the child and provide a 'child first' approach  
• Show respect  
• Be open, honest and fair  
• Celebrate individual and local community differences   
• Have passionate and committed staff, who are valued 
• Celebrate achievements   
• Be committed to providing an excellent service  
• Work effectively with other services to achieve positive outcomes for children  
• Listen to the wishes and feelings of victims and ensure a restorative approach 
• Strive to always improve 
 	  
Lancashire Youth Offending Team Safeguarding Pledges to Children  Pledge One:  
We will do our best to keep you safe from harm. 
 
Pledge Two:  
We will listen to you and do everything possible to make sure you get help when you need it. 
 
 
 
Summary of achievements    
 
There have been significant achievements in 2018-19:- 
• In partnership with other agencies YOT have had continued good performance of all national performance indicators. 
• YOT new structure was successfully established in July 2018.  
• Prevention service was successfully established in December 2018.  
• Improved links to Virtual Head of Schools through establishment of YOT ETE lead. 
• There have been over 150 AQA's achieved by children whilst working with YOT. 
• Improvements to Participation, due to a lead role being established, feedback regularly collated staff and children profiles developed. 
• Further improvements to service delivery in relation to Pan Lancashire Out of Court Disposals, with a joint Youth Disposal Panel established with Lancashire and Blackpool YOTs and supporting guidance reviewed and revised.  
• Improvements to service delivery to victims, due to a YOT lead role being established, Restorative Justice and victim contact process has been reviewed and revised and restorative justice and restorative conferencing training completed. New reparation projects are being delivered. 
• Improvements to interventions, Junior Attendance Centre 12 week programme, reviewed and revised, 'Fire days' delivered in partnership with Fire and Rescue service across the County. 
• Problem Solving approach in Blackburn, Preston and Blackpool Courts, continues to improve, lead YOT workers identified to support the developments.  
• Continued improvement to LYOT health services and care pathways, all children referred to YOT have a comprehensive health assessment completed.   
• Lancashire's YOT and SEND partnership working continues to improve with leads established in each service.   
• Improved Business Support through centralised functions. 
• Effective delivery of the learning and development plan, including training for a number of practitioners on trauma informed functional assessment and positive futures intervention programme; Quality assurance and benchmark training for managers  Special Educational Needs and Disability conference for YOT and SEND staff; Learning Disabilities workshop. Restorative justice awareness and RJ conference training, a range of AssetPlus workshops to develop the quality of assessment and planning, desistance workshop, inspection readiness workshop and Youth Justice Application Framework (YJAF workshop) have also taken place, along with the UCLAN/ YOT regional conference with presentations from a number of guest speakers from across the youth justice field covering child criminal and sexual exploitation, County Lines, isolation and loneliness and Prevent.  Evolve training has been offered for individuals responsible for undertaking risk assessments and health and safety for Reparation and Unpaid work and first aid training. All staff have also completed the mandatory prevent e-learning and information governance.  

LYOT were part of the three-year National YJB Reoffending project.  The first year was successful in identifying the key areas of focus from the YJB Reoffending Toolkit.  In the second year Lancashire YOT commissioned a three-year PhD student through the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan), to research the causes of reoffending to support improvement to LYOT practice. It was agreed that the research question will be: 'An analysis of children who reoffend in Lancashire, and the implications for YOT operational practice'. The PhD student has now completed the research and is awaiting final publication in June 2019. 
 
Innovative and promising practice   
 
Lancashire YOT continue to strive to become a Trauma Informed Service, all staff have received trauma informed awareness training and a selected cohort of YOT Social Workers have received further trauma informed training on assessment and intervention.  Further training is planned based on the Enhance Case Management process and a clinical psychologist has been identified to support these developments. LYOT has been awarded funding money from the Clinical Commissioning Group to support LYOT in achieving a trauma informed approach. 
 
In 2017-18 LYOT forged a partnership with UCLan's Criminal Justice Partnership (CJP) along with YJB, Liverpool, Blackburn with 
Darwen, Blackpool, Cumbria YOTs. The CJP key lead areas are from UCLan's Youth and Justice, Social and Restorative Justice, 
Mental Health, Violence and Aggression and Policing departments. The UCLan Youth Justice Partnership has now developed a Memorandum of Understanding and further research is planned for how Adverse Childhood Experiences impact children within the criminal justice system, evaluation into prevention services and a group has been established to improve Restorative Justice practice.  A successful staff conference took place in October 2018 and feedback was extremely positive.  
 
The YJMB have considered HMIP inspection reports published focussing on Out of Court Disposals and key findings from Blackpool YOT, actions from the learning of these reports are captured in the Action Plan below.  
 
 
Structure and Governance 
 
The YJMB, is chaired by Stephen Young and meets on a quarterly basis. Representatives include YOT's statutory and financial partners - Health NHS England, Clinical Commissioning Group and Public Health, National Probation Service, Lancashire Constabulary, LCC, and YJB, also the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner, Community Rehabilitation Company, 
Children's Social Care, senior representative from the Courts and a magistrate, senior representative from the North West area Crown Prosecution Service attends the board and other representatives from Children's services within the Local Authority. The terms of reference are regularly reviewed. The YJMB retains its focus and scrutiny on the quality of performance, financial management, effective partnership working and service delivery. The YJMB ensures timely submission of data, compliance with secure estate placement information, completion of national standards audits and reviewing community safeguarding and public protection incidents.   
 
There are strategic sub groups in place with representation from senior managers to oversee Probation, Police and Health joint working arrangements. 
 
The Head of Service is a member of the LCC's Start Well Management Team and Line managed by Sally Allen, Acting Director of Children's Social Care.  Youth Justice is an integral part of wider developments in improving service delivery and outcomes for children and families. A new induction process for YJMB members has been established and implemented in January 2019.  
 
Please see LCC's structure chart embedded within this plan. 
  	 
Resources and Value for Money 
 	 
LYOT employs in the region of 66 whole time equivalent staff, with representation from partner organisations including LCC 
Managers, Social Workers, YOT workers and Education, Training and Employment lead, Lancashire Constabulary Police Officers, 
Probation Officers and Health Services staff.  LYOT has a strong volunteer workforce which contributes in the main to Referral Orders, Reparation and Unpaid Work with children.  LYOT also commissions Appropriate Adult services, Sexually Harmful Behaviour consultancy, Speech and Language Consultancy and Triage Service (commissioned until September 2019).     
 
An ongoing area of work for the 2019-20 period is for LYOT to have effective service delivery in line with budget.  The YJMB will continue to monitor budget and performance management.  
 
LYOT's staffing profile meets the requirements of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.  Please see LYOT's structure chart, staffing profile details, volunteer profile and 'Partner contributions to the YOT Partnership Pooled Budget table' embedded within the plan.  
  
 
LYOT utilises the YJB and Junior Attendance Centre grants exclusively for the delivery and development of youth justice services as outlined in this plan. The priority areas of improvement and development that the YJB grants supports are:- 
 
• developing service delivery and supporting guidance, to continue to improve staff's skills and ability to assess, plan and provide effective interventions  
• review and revision of partnership working agreements  
• continued improvement of effective case management oversight arrangements which contributes to reducing offending and reducing of the use of custody  
   continued delivery of Junior Attendance Centre's  ? continued delivery of Unpaid work 
• continued staff learning and development to support management of change and continue to improve practice both on a short and long term basis, in accordance with LYOT's Workforce Learning and Development plan. 
 
LYOT will continue to monitor workloads and manage resources equitably in line with strategic workforce planning requirements of all LYOT partners and continue to undertake the Workforce Planning process and implement recommendations.  
 
All staff have regular supervision which includes Performance Engagement and an individual learning and development plan, a monitoring and quality assurance system has been introduced to ensure continued improvements. Workforce development will be coordinated through Strategic Management Meetings on a regular basis.  Training will be identified through supervision meetings and co-ordinated by the Advanced Practitioner.  In conjunction, lead officers for each priority area will be expected to liaise with the Advanced Practitioner and incorporate workforce development in any strategic planning.  
 
Staff and volunteers are trained in restorative justice on a regular basis.  Staff are trained as part of induction and ongoing training is identified in their Individual Learning and Development Plan.  A rolling programme of training is in place for LYOT volunteers.  The training for volunteers is regularly reviewed and revised.   All YOT staff have received restorative justice training, including awareness training and a further 23 volunteers who also have attended a condensed 2 day restorative justice training course. In January and February 2019 YOT representatives attended joint restorative justice training which included restorative conferencing with colleagues from residential services that was led by Lancashire Constabulary.  11 new volunteers have recently been recruited and completed RJ further training in April 2019.   
 
The YOT have its own Intranet to share procedures, information and a library of interventions, this is regularly reviewed and updated.  
 
The Learning and Development plan (embedded below) will be co-ordinated by a LCC's Learning and Development Team and the YOT's Advanced Practitioner to ensure effective scheduling and appropriate financial oversight of all learning and development activity. The Advanced practitioner will liaise with relevant LCC colleagues to ensure integrated workforce development.  LYOT are represented on the Workforce Development Council, who are responsible for the 2017 - 2020 Workforce Development Strategy. The vision is 'Develop further the professional multi-agency Youth Justice workforce that is highly skilled and motivated so they can work effectively with children in the youth justice sector by promoting desistance and supporting children to lead a safe and crimefree life making a positive contribution to society'. 
 
 
The Annual Learning and Development Plan in support of the Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 includes the following priorities:- 
 
• Referral order guidance workshops  
• National Standards 2019 
• County lines / Child sexual and criminal exploitation 
• Working with children who sexually harm, AIM 3 model and NWSAC workshops  
• Parenting - Positive Parenting Programmes 
• Pro Social Modelling / motivational interviewing 
• Enhanced case management approach training based on the trauma recovery model for the whole service,  
• Report writing 
• Re-settlement 
• Health including themes identified by the Emotional Health and Wellbeing Transformation Plan and substance misuse ? Restorative Justice / Working with Victims 
• AssetPlus development training 
• CareWorks system development training 
• Safeguarding including Level 2 e-learning refresher training as a minimum requirement (LSCB training plan) ? WRAP / Prevent training (annual) 
• Information governance (annual) 
 
LYOT have collated and analysed Children's and Parent's feedback.  The report covers both young person's and parent/carer's feedback completed from March 2018 - February 2019. During this period a total of 55 children and 39 parent/carer returned evaluation forms. Children and their parents/carers felt that the YOT provided positive support in the areas of education, training and employment, the work with partner agencies such as Young Addaction, and the direct contact, accessibility, knowledge and skills of YOT practitioners.  Areas identified as requiring development have been shred with all staff and will be included in the supporting action plan as appropriate. In terms of learning and future developments it may be useful to consider the following points:- 
• It is evident that some parent's/ carers did not seem to understand all of the questions on the end of intervention self assessment form. This may equally be an issue for children when we consider the prevalence of speech, language and communication needs amongst the youth justice cohort based on national statistics.  
• The end of intervention self-assessments should be completed actively as part of the exit planning process for children and families, around one month prior to the case closing, not at the last session and support should be offered to assist with explaining the questions.  
YOT case managers need to be mindful of a child's diversity considerations including their work commitments when scheduling appointments.  
• If there are numerous professionals involved in seeing the child, the case manager should coordinate this and be the main single point of contact for the family.  
• For those families who worry about YOT input ceasing, and where there are unmet needs active consideration should be given to exit planning, including referring to other services or agencies where appropriate.  
• Children should be seen for appointments in the localities where they reside and are not expected to travel long distances to appointments. 
 
 
Priorities 2019-20 
 
In continuing to deliver safe and effective services for children and Children which are fair and equitable, the key priorities for 2019 - 2020 have been identified.   
 
The key priorities for LYOT are:- 
 
• Victims and restorative justice: LYOT will focus developing services to victims through continuous improvement with partnership work with Victim Services Lancashire.  
• Reduce first time entrants: To embed LYOT prevention services. To further develop working arrangements and alignment with the wider LCC Children and Families Well-Being and Lancashire Constabulary Police Early Action Team strategy/developments. To continue to monitor the commissioned Triage service until September 2019.  To develop and implement LYOT diversionary service. 
• Reducing reoffending: To work in partnership with the University of Central Lancashire Criminal Justice Partnership on research projects to assist the LYOT in delivering trauma informed approach and understanding desistance and reoffending.  To review and improve interventions/programmes delivered to children.  
• Reducing the use of Custody: LYOT will provide robust alternative to custody packages for those at risk of receiving a custodial sentence for children assessed as being able to be managed in the community. LYOT will continue to monitor the number of children remanded to Youth Detention Accommodation (YDA) to ascertain the continued necessity of being remanded to YDA. LYOT will establish an effective partnership with HMYOI Wetherby. 
• Supporting the needs of Children Looked After: LYOT will continue to work with partners and attend and contribute to the 'In Care out of Trouble' multi agency meeting.  
• Safeguarding children: LYOT will continue to contribute to safeguarding children known to the YOT through implementing and monitoring effective partnership arrangements and improving practice.  
• Performance and quality management: LYOT and LCC will continue to improve YOT performance management monitoring arrangements from LCC's Business Intelligence Team. 
• Business Support: LYOT will continue to improve business support services to facilitate effective service delivery, ensure 
ICT is at the forefront of all that we do and consistently review our working systems and support improvements to use of CareWorks and case recording  
 
LYOT will continue its commitment to seek the views of children and children, families/carers and victims to inform service provision in Lancashire. 
 
LYOT is fully committed to listening to and supporting the engagement of children, families, victims of service users, staff and volunteers.  Staff are encouraged to share ideas and are offered opportunities for learning.  Staff ensure their behaviour is respectful and a positive influence to others within the service, our partners and the children we work with on a day to day basis. 
 
LYOT provides a fair and equitable service through its commitment to workforce planning. LYOT strives to be a learning organisation which bases its culture on a foundation of valuing difference, continuous improvement, supporting change and promoting an open and honest approach. 
 
 
Partnership arrangements 
 
The statutory partnership arrangement of LYOT remains one of its strengths. The multi-agency approach continues to bring a wealth of knowledge, sharing of skills, effective working together for children and families as well as supporting access to universal and specialist services.  
 
A joint working agreement is in place and is regularly reviewed with CSC. All YOT managers and case managers have access to 
CSC training including training in the CSC Risk Sensible framework.  Work continues to be undertaken with LYOT and Children's Social Care (CSC) in order to deliver effective and efficient services to children who are Looked After Children who offend and those in need of protection. 
 
LYOT are represented on Lancashire's Local Safeguarding Children's Board sub groups for Learning and Development, Child Sexual Exploitation / Missing from Home Operational Group, ESafety meeting, Quality Assurance and Performance Improvement and Serious Case Review group (as required). The impact of attendance at these groups assists the service in monitoring, developing and improving safeguarding practice.  
 

There is management representation at the Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) Strategic Management Board 
(SMB) and children are managed effectively under the national MAPPA guidance.  YOT staff have been trained in the national Prevent duties and processes are in place with Lancashire Prevent and Channel meetings to ensure appropriate management of children known to the YOT. 
 
The Pan Lancashire YOT's and YJB meet on a regular basis and have developed Pan Lancashire service level agreements with Victim Support, National Probation Service and Lancashire Constabulary. The YOTs also meet with Lancashire Constabulary and with senior managers in the National Probation Service to oversee partnership work.  
 
Lancashire has a Youth Justice Strategic Health group that reports to the YJMB. The group oversees YOT health commissioning arrangements and service specifications to ensure effective integrated working and best practice in relation to delivering or accessing health service and health outcomes within youth justice. There is representation from YOT, CAMHS, AMHS, Public Health Commissioner, Clinical Commissioning Groups and Safeguarding Children and Families (Nursing). There is an existing Youth Justice Health Improvement Plan in place which is overseen by the strategic group. The YOT health service provision is being reviewed with Health commissioners and providers in line with the YOT restructure in 2018. 
 
Lancashire's YJMB have appointed a Health Lead to develop and maintain an integrated health delivery system and oversee the delivery of the LYOT's Health Improvement action plan. The Lancashire Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool (CHAT) has been developed and is recognised nationally as "Quality and Good Practice". The Lancashire CHAT offers a framework of individual assessment to identify need.  There are several health disciplines within LYOT who support each child - 'a one stop shop' which supports removing barriers to health.  Each child has a speech, language and communication screen and there are specialist Speech and Language Therapists who provide dedicated consultation.   Specialist CAMHS are present within the team and pathways lead to LD / Clinical Psychology services.  Working agreements are in place to ensure access to Substance misuse practitioners for children. There are strong partnership links to external services such as dental access, sexual health, CLA nurses, CJL&D and health information is shared appropriately with the child's GP, school nurse and other relevant parties with the child's consent. Developments are required to deliver immunisation and vaccination services across the County, a new service provider has been commissioned. The health performance framework continues to report health outcomes to the YJMB and Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCG), plans are in place to improve the performance monitoring framework.    
 
The County Health Co-ordinator represents LYOT at the Vulnerable Young Person's and Crisis work streams of Lancashire's Children and Young People's Resilience, Emotional Wellbeing and Mental Health Transformation Plan 2015 - 2020, a long term project intended to improve services to children. 
 
A successful joint conference with YOT and Special Educational Needs and Disability Service was held in April 2018 that further improved understanding of SEND and joint working arrangements.  
 
LYOT have systems and support mechanisms in place which will provide all children with the opportunities to successfully access education, training and employment.  Strategic links have been developed to engage with Education and School Improvement services at both the YJMB and operationally through the LYOT ETE Lead. 
 
Partnership work with Lancashire Fire and Rescue Service and Police Early Action teams, has brought about significant benefits for improving outcomes for children.  
 
An Appropriate Adult service is commissioned by LYOT and provided by Child Action North West (CANW). Regular contract monitoring and review is in place.  The service specification has been agreed in line with national developments to ensure consistent commissioning across Pan Lancashire with the two neighbouring Unitary YOTs. 
 
LYOT commission and monitor a Triage service on behalf of Lancashire's Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) this is provided by CANW, it supports diverting children from the youth justice system and deters them from re-offending and/or becoming a first time entrant. The child will complete interventions; namely reparation, a letter of apology and a session on consequences. The PCC has committed to continue commissioning the service until September 2019.  From September 2019 LYOT will deliver diversionary services to children but on a bespoke basis, including screening, assessed and intervention.  
 
The YOT will continue to contribute to Lancashire's Scrutiny Panel to support the Pan Lancashire continuous improvements to delivering Out of Court Disposals.   
 
LYOT's spot purchases the North West Sexual Abuse Consultancy (NWSAC) to provide case consultation for children who sexually offend.  
 
In respect of children aged 16-17 who are homeless, there is an accommodation protocol between housing authorities and children's social care to ensure that children can have access to emergency accommodation while an assessment in respect of child in need or looked after status is decided. 
 
LYOT will continue to work in partnership with Lancashire's Fostering Service, Emergency Duty Team and Lancashire 
Constabulary to manage and provide appropriate accommodation for children transferred to Local Authority Accommodation via the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) provisions.  
 
Partnership working arrangements with Children and Families Wellbeing Service (CFW) have been developed that includes working with Police Early Action Teams. LYOT, in conjunction with partners, contribute to the working arrangements and developments of the Troubled Families project across Lancashire. One of the primary objectives of the programme is to embed the principles of family assessment, family working and family action planning.  
 
LYOT attends and contributes to the meetings with Lancashire's Courts and has developed a 'problem solving approach', a model providing relevant multi agency, early intervention and targeted support to children appearing at Court.  LYOT provides a service for the central Court in Lancashire held on Saturday's and Bank Holidays overseen by LCC's Emergency Duty Team (EDT).  
 
To support improvements to service delivery there are specialist operational support groups in place for LYOT practitioners, for example, Health practitioners, seconded Police Officers and Probation Officers.  
 
 
Risks to future delivery against the three outcome measures 
 
The Youth Justice Peer Review's (October 2017) focus was on LYOT's governance arrangements and operational delivery. An improvement action plan was developed and implemented, key findings have led to revision of the induction process for all YJMB members and members linking with operational staff were appropriate. In relation to improving consistency and clarity of delivery of the service across the county, the feedback informed the review of the service structure and in July 2018 LYOT restructured from the three area based teams to a single county team. Roles and responsibilities of practitioners and managers have been reviewed and revised to ensure continuity of priority service delivery.  A new management structure is in place which now includes a Practice Manager overseeing Prevention work, an ETE lead, an Advanced Practitioner focusing on quality and development of service provision and a Performance, Development and Review officer contributing to detailed performance analysis.   Social Workers and Probation Officers continue to be designated as primary case managers accountable for completing statutory AssetPlus assessments, planning, intervention and reviews. YOT workers lead on key areas of work in particular, contributing to AssetPlus, intervention programmes, prevention work, parenting / family support, participation, supporting volunteers and restorative justice.  Designated AssetPlus trainers are ensuring staff remain supported with AssetPlus and new staff appropriately trained.  
 
LYOT have been involved in the ongoing learning from Lancashire Children's Services post Ofsted inspection improvement plan, monitoring takes monthly of staff supervision, all assessments have qualified worker oversight, staff have been made aware to ensure attention is given to the young person's history in undertaking assessments and the multi-agency nature of assessments and risk management.   
 
Learning from Inspections 
 
HMIP inspection reports are reviewed by Managers within LYOT.  The Team Manager with lead responsibility for this area reviews thematic inspections reports and HMIP YOT Inspection reports as appropriate.   
 
LYOT have reviewed thematic inspection reports published and have completed self assessments and have identified improvement actions: 
• Desistance - review completed in 2018-19 and led to delivering AssetPlus workshops to support practitioners linking of desistance factors to intervention planning. 
• Referral Order - review completed in 2018-19 improvement action plan has now been developed and implementation has commenced.  
• Resettlement - review completed in 2018-19 an implement improvement action plan has been developed including planning for training. 
• Out of Court Disposals review completed, information shared with YJMB and Pan Lancs guidance updated, accordingly. 
 
Learning from Blackpool YOT inspection, summary report completed for the YJMB, shared learning from partners involved in the inspection has been undertaken. 
 
Performance Management  
 	 
LYOT continues to prioritise performance management, including quality assurance, within the organisation.  As such, LYOT has developed a strong performance management culture through all aspects of the service.  The Performance Management Framework was reviewed and revised in April 2019.  Along with quarterly reports to the YJMB, LYOT produces quarterly and monthly performance information and supports quarterly performance analysis meetings.  LYOT performance monitoring has been embedded into the Business Intelligence (BI) team's provision. The BI team have started developing a heat map for the service which uses RAG ratings to show service activity and performance information for each of the key functions of the LYOT. This will help managers to quickly pick out areas of high/low activity and good/deteriorating performance and take time to validate the data and accordingly take measures to improve performance where required.  Recent developments have also included making best use of the Vulnerabilities report which was provided by CareWorks in response to the Children Commissioner's request for Gangs data. The BI team and LYOT believe that the report can add value to existing quarterly service performance metrics. 
 
Quality assurance, including the accuracy of LYOT systems, data and information held, is undertaken by audit work and reports provided to a Children's services Data Quality and Performance group. 
 
LYOT has performed well against the three national indicators over the last year.  LYOT has continued to see First Time Entrants remain low over the year and is in the 2nd quartile nationally for this measure (8 places outside the top / upper quartile).  
Performance for Reducing the Use of Custody has also improved with continued low numbers and performance at a stable rate for another year.  LYOT has seen the Reoffending Rate slightly increase over the last 12 months which has meant that the national ranking has gone down. Although the rate has increased the actual numbers of children reoffending and the numbers in the cohort has been reducing.  Those children who remain in the system have the most complex needs and often the most challenging ingrained behaviour and reoffending remains an issue.  The number of children who are high risk to themselves or to the public remains high.   
 
The current latest YJB performance against the three indicators is as follows: 
 
1. First Time Entrants to the Youth Justice System - (October 2017-Sept 2018) - 207 children per 100,000 of 10 - 17 year old population; an increase of 7 on the previously reported (Jul 2017-Jun 2018) number. Local FTE data shows that the highest number of referrals come from the Preston district where the number recently spiked at 16 during Q2 2018/19 (July - Sept 18); numbers have since come down to 9 during Q3 2018/19 (October - Dec 18). 
 
2. Reoffending of children in the Youth Justice System - (January 2017-March 2017) - 45.5%; an increase of 6.8% to the previously reported (October 2016-December 2016) position. The Cohort for this quarter is 121 (137 last quarter) and the number of reoffenders is 55 (53 last quarter) - relatively small changes in these types of numbers can have a big effect on the overall percentage.  
  
3. Reducing the Use of Custody for children - (January 2018-December 2018) - 0.22 children per 1000 of 10-17 year old population; at the same level as the previous reported (October 2017 - September 2018) position. 
 
LYOT produce monthly, quarterly and annual management information regarding Children Looked After (CLA) who offend.  This enables tracking and monitoring of levels of CLA offending against the general offending population. In addition LYOT routinely monitor the NEET (Not in Education, Employment or Training) status of those on YOT programmes. In 2017-18 LYOT introduced an internal monitoring system for children, parent carer's feedback, this is regularly reported to the YJMB. 
 
LYOT undertakes regular auditing of cases, staff supervision records and all learning is fed back to individuals and teams and service improvement actions identified are incorporated and monitored through the Youth Justice Plan.  
During 2019-20 the YOT will continue to: 	 
• Continue to ensure effective local reporting for the three Youth Justice Indicators; 
• Review and revise LYOT's Performance Management Framework; 
• Ensure that there is an enhanced focus on improving performance in the Preston district; 
• Implement the new monitoring arrangements, utilising the 'heat map' and the vulnerabilities report, review monitoring arrangements of Youth Justice National Standards;  
• Continue to undertake reviews and improvements regarding data quality assurance, as part of the quarterly analyses meetings; 
• Review workforce planning; 
 
 
Risks to Future Delivery  Risk Identified Level of concern Action to be taken Performance management of National Standards has not been prioritised for monitoring, consequently performance is uncertain and therefore an inspection risk.   Med New National Standards have been issued by YJB in February 2019, LYOT to provide training to staff, clarify timescales and YOT/BIT will develop monitoring systems against prioritised National Standards.  National and local agenda for youth justice remains uncertain. Low Ensure effective communication with staff and partners. Ongoing uncertainty regarding year on year partnership funding and reductions, limited opportunity for long term planning.  High Standing item on the YJMB agenda and HOS Pan Lancashire meeting. All avenues explored including use of reserves and reviewing and developing service delivery.  Where appropriate pursuing options for additional grant funding.   
Approval 
 
Signed:                               	 	Date: 26/07/2019 
 
Edwina Grant Director of Education and Children's Services  
 
Signed:                               	 	 	Date: 01/08/2019 
 
Stephen Young Chair Youth Jusctice Management Board  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Youth Justice Action Plan 2019 -2020 
 
Lancashire Youth Offending Team 
Youth Justice Action Plan April 2019 - March 2020 Resourcing and Workforce Development Desired Outcome Action(s) Lead(s) Timescales Date Reviewed / Outcome 1. Improved strategic and operational youth justice services. To address the recommendations from the HM 
Inspectorate of Probation's joint inspection of youth justice services in Lancashire, following the receipt of the final report in July 2019. BB/CE Initial draft 
September 
2020  2. Staff to work in creative and innovative ways to deliver good outcomes for children. To be part of the YJB's North West Consortium of YOTs to share and develop good practice across youth services.  TM and/or PMs Ongoing / March 2020  To implement and embed a Trauma Informed assessment and intervention and develop ' Enhanced Case Management' approach within service.  
To explore future training plans for Trauma informed work.  
• Trauma awareness workshop to be delivered in Oct 
2019 and offered to regional YOTs 
• Monthly meetings to be arranged for the practitioners trained functional assessment and positive futures programme with regular clinical supervision sessions with Clinical Psychologist. 
• Developing a pathway to ensure all appropriate cases are considered for functional assessment and intervention and ensure all case managers are aware of this process. CE / BS / 
Health Lead Ongoing / March 2020  Maintain good working knowledge utilising research in practice, and to continue to engage with the Youth Justice and UCLan's Criminal Justice Partnership to inform practice development CE / BS  Ongoing  / March 2020  3. To have up to date and accurate management information to inform performance management. To use the newly developed 'Heat Maps' approach to enhance performance analysis and management. CE / TMs /  Oct 2019  To review and revise use LYOT's use of Careworks. TMs / LB / BIT / LW Oct 2019  
4. To have effective business support, information, and performance management arrangements. Business Support to support improvements to performance management by reviewing and improving data inputting. LB / LW  Ongoing  / March 2020  To review and improve business support systems  LB  Ongoing  / March 2020  5. To comply with LCC's information governance arrangements. 
 
 To work with the LCC Information Governance Team to develop YOT working practices in relation to Information Governance. LW / IG 
Team  Ongoing  / March 2020  To provide training and information to ensure all staff members are aware of their responsibilities with regard to Information Governance. TMs / IG 
Team March 2020  6. To implement the Youth 
Justice skill matrix for all staff and Knowledge and Skills Statement (KSS) for Social 
Workers  To ensure relevant staff are aware of the requirements relating to the KSS and Youth Justice skills matrix and to use information to inform LYOT's learning and development plan. BS  March 2020   7. To have a healthy workforce and health and wellbeing of staff is prioritised. To consult with staff and support, encourage and coordinate initiatives and actions which promote the health and wellbeing of staff. CE / LS / JC  Ongoing  / March 2020  Reducing First Time Entrants Desired Outcomes Action(s) Lead(s) Timescales Date Reviewed / Outcome 8. Children are appropriately diverted from the Youth 
Justice system. In partnership with the Police, develop a holistic diversionary service, to provide children and their families with a bespoke package to prevent offending or further offending.   CE / HB / MB 
/ Carolyn 
Melvin 
(Police)  Implement 
Sept 2019  
 
 
 
 
 	  9. To embed effective prevention services and ensure the right access to support for children in the Youth Justice system and their families. To develop a joint prevention of offending and improvement action plan, led by LYOT, Police and Children and Families Wellbeing service. 
To align and embed pathways to Police Early Help, Children and Families Well-Being service from Prevention, LYOT services. CE / HB / MB  
/ Carolyn 
Melvin 
(Police) / 
Kathy 
Ashworth 
(CFW) Oct 2019   10. To deliver effective To review in consultation with Police colleagues, the nature of referrals to the Prevention and LYOT service, HB / MB / ML   	Oct 2019  
prevention services.  and types of offending with particular focus on the Preston district and any related incidents to knife crime. To monitor the type of referrals received on a quarterly basis to the Prevention service in order to identify emerging trends or types of offending behaviour presented and report back to the YJMB. LW March 2020  To contribute to developing a knife crime prevention strategy in partnership with LCC Children's Service's and Police and other partners. CE March 2020  Reducing Re-Offending Desired Outcome Action(s) Lead(s) Timescales Date Reviewed / Outcome 11. To have an effective Referral Order process. To implement the Referral Order improvement plan, with a focus on improving consistency of engagement, improving positive outcomes and factors which support desistance.  Referral order to be underpinned by the principles of restoration, reparation and reintegration with a child first approach.  Ensuring that Referrals Orders with Intensive Contracts are appropriately used and that all volunteers and staff are well trained to ensure that the victim's voice is heard throughout.   LS / BS Aug 2019  12. To implement learning from the Reducing Reoffending PhD findings. To review the final Reducing Reoffending PhD and summary learning report, consider and implement any relevant recommendations for LYOT. CE / ML  Sept 2019.  13. To target interventions effectively. The use of the YJB Reducing Reoffending Toolkit to support the identification of those more likely to commit further offences. LW Oct 2019  To review all cases in line with case planning system to ensure effective exit strategies are addressed within intervention plans. PM's -
Operations Oct 2019  Reducing the Use of Custody Desired Outcomes Action(s) Lead(s) Timescales Date Reviewed / Outcome 14. To ensure the effective reintegration of children into To ensure that the actions identified in the selfassessment, based on the HMIP Resettlement thematic RF / LS / KE / JC June 2019  
the community who have been in custody. 
 inspection, are implemented. To maintain and develop link to the Secure Estate, including the working relationships, and improving post release meetings. RF / LS / KE / JC June 2019  15. To ensure effective high tariff community disposals are available to sentencers. To further improve programmes and interventions for Intensive Supervision and Surveillance and Integrated Resettlement Service. RF / LS / KE June 2019  Cross Cutting Desired Outcomes  Desired Outcomes Action(s) Lead(s) Timescales Date Reviewed / Outcome 16. To have effective communication between LYOT children known to YOT and all stakeholders. To develop LYOT's social media presence on a variety of platforms to ensure that information is shared with children, parents, carers, victims, LYOT Staff, volunteers and partner agencies. RF / LW Sept 2019  To finalise developing the app with UCLan's media department to communicate with children known to YOT including reporting self-assessment information and service feedback. RF / UCLan March 2020  To undertake joint conference with YJMB, key partners and staff to share YOT practice and further improve YJMB links to operational practice.     17. To ensure that all children known to the YOT have the opportunity for appropriate education, training or employment placements. To set and achieve higher targets for children to attain in Education, Training and Employment within YOT KE June 2019  To have offer all YOT children the opportunity to complete AQA's KE Ongoing / March 2020  To work towards achieving the SEND/YOT partnership Achievement for all - Quality Lead KE March 2020  18. To ensure that the diversity of children in the Criminal Justice System is recognised with appropriate interventions to improve outcomes. To implement the actions in the self-assessment, based on the HMIP thematic inspection of girls in the Criminal Justice System. BS / LS / 
WG   19. To ensure children are central to the design and delivery of the service. To review all feedback and suggestions from children and parent/carers to support improving services, including the Children and Parent feedback analysis report 2018-19.  YOT to embed the 'You said, We did' LW Ongoing / March 2020  
approach.  To hold regular workshops/focus groups with children to seek contributions and feedback in order to enhance future service developments. LS Ongoing / March 2020  To celebrate the successes of children in a variety of ways including in-house, local, and national events. LS Ongoing / March 2020  To further consult with children about the problem solving approach within the court arena. ML May 2019  20. All YJMB members and LYOT staff to understand and implement the National standards for children within the Youth Justice system 2019. To agree local service delivery and monitoring arrangements to ensure consistency and effectiveness in service delivery. CE / ML April 2019  Ensure all staff are aware of the New National standards and the implications for practice. All YOT Managers April 2019  To review and agree implementation of the New National standards alongside YJMB members, relevant Partner agencies, YOT staff and across Pan Lancashire. YJMB / CE / 
ML / HoS 
YOTs / YJB June 2019   21. Volunteers to be used effectively and appropriately to support the delivery of YOT services. To provide Volunteers with future training and developments as proposed by the revised National Standards, including volunteer feedback.  LS Oct 2019  To be more creative with the use of the LYOT volunteers by utilising volunteer's knowledge of local communities, supporting JACs and reparation projects and contributing to mentoring.  Including the use of Police volunteers in supporting restorative conferencing.  LS Ongoing / March 2020  22. To ensure access to parenting service provision. To train staff to deliver appropriate parenting support including family group conferencing and Triple P parenting programmes.  LS Ongoing / March 2020  To ensure effective pathways to Children and Family Well-Being Services and CSC to refer YOT families to appropriate parenting services and Family Group Conferencing. LS Ongoing / March 2020  23. To enhance service delivery for Restorative Justice for children, victims and the community. To develop pathways between LYOT and the Police RJ Team to achieve effective joint working. MB / LS Oct 2019  To improve victim feedback processes to support service improvements. LS Oct 2019  
24. To ensure all children known to the LYOT have comprehensive health assessments (LCHA) and plans and access to appropriate services in YOT health and pathways to external services. To review and revise the Youth Justice Health Action Plan to undertake the continued service improvements of youth justice health services and pathways, including: - Improving the integrated youth justice health performance management framework and develop YOT health services to align with YOT restructure and service needs. CE / ML / JC Ongoing / March 2020  25. To ensure effective partnership arrangements and the service has an overall understanding of serious Youth Violence/ County lines/CSE/CCE within Lancashire.  To review the nature of offences to analyse the data information and determine whether serious Youth Violence/County lines/CSE/CCE is an emerging picture within Lancashire. LW / RF  Dec 2019   To develop key partnerships with relevant services in relation to Child Criminal and Sexual Exploitation BB/CE June 2019  26. To have effective links with local Community Safety To review LYOT contribution and participation within the county's local Community Safety Partnership forums. CE / ML Sept 2019  27. To have effective links with 
Magistrates and Court users. To attend the Youth Panel, sharing achievements and ensuring the child first approach is maintained. ML Ongoing / March 2019   To seek feedback as to the performance of LYOT within the Court arena to support service improvements. ML / LW Ongoing / Sept 2019  To consider including magistrates in the review process for children as per Northamptonshire Youth Offending Service, in an informal setting. ML   To offer the opportunity for local Magistrates to spend time within the Youth Offending Service and shadow practitioners. ML Ongoing / Sept 2019  28. To ensure effective operational working relationships with partner agencies Develop and/or review and revise Service Level Agreements/working arrangements: 
1. CSC 
2. Children and Families Wellbeing Service 
3. Pan Lancashire National Probation Trust - monitor 
4. Lancashire Joint Agency Protocol - Incidents and offences in Children's Homes - monitor 
5. LCC Property Strategy (re LYOT) 
6. CAMHS/AMHS  
1. CE/BS 
2. CE/ML 
3. CE/ML 
4. CE/BB 
5. BB 
6. CE/JC Reviews 
due - April 
2019 - March 2020   7. Substance Misuse - Young Addaction 
8. Sexual Health 
9. Speech and Language 
10. Police - secondment arrangements and operational working arrangements and role profile 
11. Pan Lancashire Court Protocol 
12. Victim Support 
13. Education and Training providers 
14. Pan Lancashire Managing Sexually Harmful Behaviour Procedures - to be reviewed on a Pan 
Lancashire basis annually with Blackpool and Blackburn with Darwen YOTs and Lancashire Constabulary. 7. JC 
8. JC 
9. CE/JC 
10. CE/ML 11. CE/ML 
12. CE/ML 
13. BB/KE 
14. ML/DJ  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 - Shared Vision for Children's Services 

Appendix 2 - LCC Corporate Structure Charts (Please note these are subject to change due to ongoing service reviews) 




Appendix 4 - Budget and Staffing Tables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 5 - Lancashire YOT - Learning and Development Plan 2019/20 
 
Learning and Development Priorities April 2019 - March 2020 
 
Training/ Activity Notes Lead 
Officer/s When Mandatory 
(M) or identified though IDLP How delivered Update/action Trauma informed assessment Dr Nicola Graham-Kevan and Fiona Wilks-Riley. To be offered to those case managers who have not previously attended. 
1. Trauma Informed Assessment and Formulation Training 
2. Positive Futures Youth Version Training  
 
9 Case managers have identified this in their L&D plans. Also need PM's to attend to support implementation.  CE/BS TBA during 2019/20 M for identified case managers Positive Futures  
 Enhanced 
Case 
Management training Enhanced case management training facilitated by Johnny Matthews to be commissioned. Dates proposed in November 2019. The Exchange do not have any availability and therefore looking at the civic centre in Leyland. PC to look into the availability of rooms.  CE/BS Nov 2019 M for all staff apart from business support Johnny Matthews  Advanced 
Careworks system 
development training To develop use of CareWorks to an advanced level, to have a better understand of how Careworks can assist the YOT in monitoring performance. Consider whether Careworks will be available to deliver training to identified LYOT staff, business intelligence and core business systems. 
Relevant learning can then be cascaded to relevant YOT staff. 
YOT PDRO to liaise with Careworks to arrange.  CE/BS/ PDRO TBA    M - for identified staff Careworks  Interventions AIM training - to be commissioned once the new 
AIM 3, new Intervention for Adolescents and a new Under 12s training and guidance have been launched in summer 2019. 
 
Will need to take into account course entry levels in line with AIM Quality Assurance Framework.  In order to attend future courses practitioners need to CE/BS/ PC September 2019 ILDP AIM commissioned training  
 
 
 
have a good basic knowledge of Child and 
Adolescent Harmful Sexual Behaviour (HSB) which can be gained by attending the new Basic Awareness course. Individuals will also need specific practice experience.   
 
21 case managers/YOT workers have identified this in with ILDP's plus 2 managers for the AIM for managers training. Will need to review at what level there are at prior to booking them onto a course.  
 
If commissioning training for LYOT staff then to complete this alongside CSC Parenting - Training for staff members in delivering parenting programmes.  
YOT workers to be identified to deliver the programme.  LS/BS TBA M - for YOT workers Commissioned 
training through Triple -P  Pro-social modelling / motivational interviewing - To be provided to practitioners who have not completed this training previous and any members of staff who require refresher training. This training will develop Staff Skill Sets and Relationship Based Practice.  
Review providers for this training: 
Delight training - Steve Delight 
Bryn Mitchell - ELCAS YOT Health worker could deliver Motivational interviewing training 
YJB recommended provider - 
https://www.interfaceenterprises.co.uk/training/skillstraining/course/motivational-interviewing  CE/BS TBA ILDP Commissioned 
training   Training for 
YOT volunteers 
 Training for YOT volunteers to be reviewed and updated in line with national guidance.  
Logistics for LYOT delivering to be explored and plan developed to ensure delivery is in line with LS/BS TBA M TBC   
recommendations.  
 
New volunteers also complete: 
• Safeguarding Level 1 e-learning https://loginvle.cleo.net.uk/login19/cypvle.lancsngfl.ac.uk 
• Child Sexual Exploitation (https://loginvle.cleo.net.uk/login19/cypvle.lancsngfl.ac.uk 
• Introduction to the Youth Justice System https://yjresourcehub.uk/login.html 
• Engaging Young People who Offend 
https://yjresourcehub.uk/login.html 
• Channel Training https://yjresourcehub.uk/login.html 
 Information Governance All YOT staff are required to complete their annual Information Governance e-learning in line with LCC policy/procedures.  DH/BS End of May 2019 M E-learning   County 
Lines/CCE/ CSE  Child sexual exploitation awareness (CSE) - elearning 
 BS 
 
 Completed by end of July 
2019  
M  
E-learning  Send Bubble training All staff to complete the SEND Bubble e-learning.  
https://bubble.afaeducation.org/login  KE End of June 2019 M e-learning  Health and safety All staff to complete the mandatory LCC health and safety e-learning (this needs to be refreshed every 3 years) BS End of April 2019 M -  for those who need to refresh E-Learning  Training to support client group To explore options for learning and development opportunities linked to client group's needs. This may include learning and development around CE/BS TBC M TBC  serious youth violence.   
 
Development workshops April 2018 - March 2019   
Training/ Activity Notes Lead Officer/s When Mandatory (M) or identified though 
IDLP How delivered Update/action Referral Orders Internal YOT workshops - following the actions identified in the task and finish group. 
 LS/BS TBC M YOT workshops  Report writing/court etiquette Pre-Sentence 
Report/Out of Court Disposal Report writing workshop. Workshop to also address court etiquette. 
To be completed by all social workers and probation officers who are responsible for the preparation of reports and attend court. BS TBA M (for relevant staff) YOT workshop  Resettlement Workshops to be developed based on 
learning requirements from task and finish group looking at the LYOT self-assessment and HMIP thematic inspection. RF/LS TBA M YOT workshops  
NWSAC workshops NWSAC workshops 
for 2019/20 to support staff in working with young people displaying sexually harmful 
behaviour. four  workshops throughout the year facilitated by North 
West Sexual Abuse 
Consultancy (NWSAC) pclark@nwsac.org.uk Topics for workshops to be developed by DJ. DJ Quarterly throughout 2019/20 M- for individuals working with YP displaying SHB Workshops  
  Health To provide workshops for YOT staff around health issues to include speech and language and the enhanced communication tool, YOT and CAMHS links. 
JC developing programme for workshops JC TBA M Workshops   AssetPlus development workshops Workshops to be developed in line with national developments and local requirements.  Workshops will be informed by the outcomes of audits CE/BS TBA M Advanced 
Practitioner   CCE Workshops to be developed to explore CCE and delivered to team members.  KC/BS TBA M Workshop   National Workshop to be BS/Op's PM's June 2019 M YOT workshop  
Standards developed to ensure all staff have an understanding and awareness of the implications for practice of the 2019 National standards  Purposeful Practice 
Workshops Case managers to attend relevant Purposeful Practice Workshops. 
BS to explore which of the workshops below are relevant for case managers to attend.  
 
PP01N   Principles of 
Assessment 
PP02N   Purposeful 
Plans and Reviews 
PP03N   Structured 
Analysis 
PP04N   Connected 
Carers and Family 
Placement Options 
PP222N Right 
Placement for the Right Child 
PP05N   Effective 
Pre-Proceedings Protocol and Court work 
PP06N   Clear 
Thresholds and 
Decision Making 
PP07N   Creative Direct Work - Tools for Engaging Children and 
Families 
PP08N   Identifying BS TBC M for relevant staff CSC workshops  and Processing reunifications 
PP09N   Health 
Assessments and 
SDQ's 
PP10N   Early 
Permanence 
PP173N Good 
practice in Child 
Permanence Reports 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 6 - Child and Family Feedback 
End of Programme Self Assessments 
 
Lancashire Youth Offending Team collate service user feedback through use of the Youth Justice Board End of Intervention SelfAssessment's for child and parent/ carer. 
This has a number of questions designed to give the child and parent/ carer an opportunity to reflect on their experience of YOT intervention and to voice their views. To aid service development, responses to the End of Intervention Self-Assessment forms have been collated and analysed for the period March 2018 to March 2019. This information is presented with the questions on the self-assessments as headers.  
Table - Total number of Child and Parent/ Carer End Self Assessments completed per month March 18 - March 19; 
 
 Programmes ending  
 
(data from Careworks of all programmes ending where the order was completed 
successfully, not concluded) Child end self-
Assessments completed  
 
(and sent to business support for analysis) Parent/ Carer End SelfAssessments completed  
 
(and send to business support for analysis) March 18 25  2 3 April 13 1 0 May  18 5 4 June  21 4 3 July 16 7 5 Aug 30 6 4 Sep 30 10 10 Oct 16 13 2 Nov 22 2 2 Dec 13 0 0 Jan 19 22 4 2 Feb 22 1 1 March 13 19 16 Total  261 74 52  
Child End of Intervention Self-Assessment Analysis 
What things in your life have got better? 
The majority of children (forty three) who responded to this question indicated that their lives had improved during the course of YOT interventions.  
Nine children indicated "nothing" in their lives had got better, two cited things had stayed the same, and one didn't answer. 
 
What things in your life have got better? 
The majority of children (forty three) who responded to this question indicated that their lives had improved during the course of YOT interventions.  
Nine children indicated "nothing" in their lives had got better, two cited things had stayed the same, and one didn't answer. 
 
The themes evident amongst responses were; 
• Relationships with family had improved   
• Relationships at school had improved  
• New friendships  
• Improved attendance at ETE 
• Learning to deal with emotions, including anger and  improved mental health 
• Improved confidence  
• Learning how to interact in a positive way with others. 
• Managing to stay out of trouble   
• Accessing work or ETE 
• Realising dangers 
• Reduced use of or not drinking alcohol / substances  
• More stable accommodation  
 
Examples of responses; 
"Everything. I feel better having a job earning my own money; being able to buy my own things.   My new mates are older but family friends. Go out/chill at each other's homes. Not spending time with idiots. Just having a more chilled life & better life. Not staying out till 2 in the morning. Going home and getting up for work." 
"My attitude to life itself has got much better and my happiness has improved" 
"I don't get in trouble anymore" 
 
Have things in your life got worse? 
 
Seven children indicated that things in their lives had got worse.  However this appeared to be as a result of factors such as:  ? "Relationship with boyfriend" 
• "Everything"  
• "Parents separated and mum moved away" 
• "Depression but not all of the time" 
• "Lost job"  
 
What has been good about coming to the YOT? 
The majority (forty five) of children identified something that had been good about coming to YOT, with only five children reporting 'nothing' had been good.  
Themes across responses were; 
• Residential trip 
• Having something to do 
• Having someone to speak to, who listens 
• Getting advice  
• Understanding the consequences of offending and how  	this can impact on life chances  
• Help to improve behaviour and stop offending 
Examples of responses: 
"The support and the help that you get - they help people out to think about things." 
"Having a home visit to complete my work.   Feel more comfortable." "My worker worked around my commitments, seeing me after work if needed" 
 
 
 
 
What has been bad about coming to the YOT?  
The majority of children (thirty four), said that nothing had been bad about coming to the YOT, although fifteen children identified something. 
Responses varied as follows;  
• 1 child stated "no one wants to be on YOT" 
• 1 child indicated it had "made me feel guilty" 
• 1 child stated it "stopped me from living my life getting a job" 
• 1 child stated it was "boring - some of it"  
• 1 child cited issues with a specific worker 
• 1 child said it had impacted on his ability to attend work occasionally - "A few times I have had to miss work and his has caused me to lose money." 
• 1 child said "when I had off days I felt down, couldn't be bothered with 
it." 
• 1 child said "Getting up in the morning for appointments" 
• 1 child stated "I found group work hard" 
• 1 child stated "Just having to attend when I keep forgetting. 
 
I worry about what might happen after I finish at the YOT and I know where to get help if I need it in the future; 

 
How could YOT have provided further help? 
• One child requested that a letter be issued detailing convictions. 
• One child reported they were concerned about their anxiety but would contact services themselves.  
• One child reported they would like someone to talk to outside of the care home.  
• One child said they would like general support, leaflets and phone numbers to other agencies 
All other children reported they needed no further help from the YOT. 
 
Parent/ Carer End of Intervention Self-Assessment Analysis 
 
Has the support given to you or your child helped you as a parent/carer? 
42 parents/ carers indicated that the support given to them or their child had helped them as a parent/ carer. 5 parents/ carers indicated that it had not.  
 

Some examples of responses;  
"P was willing to hear my concerns and helped without question or judgement" 
"It's definitely helped with progress L has made in himself. His remorse and understanding and he's not reoffended there has been no police at my door." 
"L trusted H & her other YOT workers & they showed her the right way of doing good and made her look at things in a whole different way" 
"I was always kept informed and they asked if there was anything they could talk to J about if I needed them too." 
"The YOT SW was always happy to listen and organised sessions with professionals such as CAMHS/Addaction.  We were able to reflect on our responses to specific behaviours. 
 
Of those who indicated they had not found the support helpful one parent said "nothing", 2 said "n/a" and 1 said "Parenting was not an issue prior to the offence". These responses suggest that some of the respondents might not have fully understood the question.  
 
Has there been any change in your child's behaviour? 
 
40 parents/ carers indicated that there had been a change in their child's behaviour 
Responses centred on the following themes;  ? 	No further offending 
• Improved behaviour in the home  
• Calmer / less aggressive  
• More mature  
• Reduction in alcohol/ substance misuse 
• Improved family relationships  
• More remorseful 
• Engaging with ETE 
• Improved emotional health/ well being  
• Referrals and support from other services 
Examples of responses; 
"L has done a lot of growing up in the past 12 months, she's taken herself away from bad situations, made new friends and improved her behaviour and attitude." 
"She is more happy and starts going out more instead of sitting at home all day" 
"I've only seen a slight change in C behaviour towards me.  He is not as aggressive and speaks to me more about things." "Yes, he's calmer and not getting into any more trouble" 
6 parents indicated there had not been a change. 2 of the 6 indicated there were no problem with their child's behaviour to begin with. Four gave responses which centred around;  
	Refusing to attend education   	Not coming home   	No structure   	Still not going to school and has a temper 
 
 
 
What do you feel has helped your child the most during their time with the YOT? 
Responses indicated that the following themes were found to be helpful; 
• Having someone to talk to, who would give the child time and listen to them - building relationships  
• General support 
• Having a consistent worker  
• Support to access ETE  
• Help with managing emotions  
• Support for individual needs  
• Referrals and support from other services 
Example responses; 
"S has been a brilliant support for L and myself, she helped me through a really bad time and I honestly wouldn't have been able to handle L at the time as we were all grieving". 
"YOT being able to accommodate l's needs with home visits". 
"Going on the princes trust course helped so much because it helped her meet new people and feel more confident". 
"Recognising C's attachment disorder and him understanding the reason he behaves like he does is for a reason and a pattern". "He's been able to build relationships and trust". 
 
What do you feel has been less helpful? 
There were only a limited number of responses provided for this question with varied points and no consistent themes. Of those responses the following points were made;  
• Location of the YOT building - child having to travel  
• Gaps in communication when appointments are with different services - child and family not always being clear about appointments 
• Having to discuss offences that occurred historically 
• Seeing other young people at appointments who the child was trying to avoid  ? One parent commented that it was other services that were unhelpful 
 
I feel a bit worried about what might happen when my child finishes at the YOT 
 
The vast majority of parents/ carers were not worried about their child finishing YOT. Of the thirteen who said they were worried, all but one felt YOT had provided the child with the services and help they needed. 
Those who were worried and identified a need for further support felt it would be useful if YOT support could continue after the order expired. 
 
Do you think the YOT has provided your child with the services and help they needed? 
All but two parent/carer(s) said they felt the YOT had provided their child with the services and help they needed.  One parent/ carer said they didn't know, but did not identify any specific services or support the child needed and indicated YOT could not do anymore to help.  
 
In Conclusion; 
Overall the feedback received from children and families where the end self-assessments have been completed is positive.  The main improvements seem to be in key areas of the child's life, such as accommodation, ETE and relationships at home.  In the main children and families feel that they benefit from the support offered by the Youth Offending Team.  In terms of learning and future developments it may be useful to consider the following points;  
• It is evident that some parent's/carers did not seem to understand all of the questions on the end of intervention selfassessment form.  This may equally be an issue for children when we consider the prevalence of speech, language and communication needs amongst the youth justice cohort based on national statistics.  
• The end of intervention self-assessments should be completed actively as part of the exit planning process for children and families, around one month prior to the case closing, not at the last session and support should be offered to assist with explaining the questions.  
• YOT case managers need to be mindful of a child's diversity considerations including their work commitments when scheduling appointments.  
• If there are numerous professionals involved in seeing the child, the case manager should coordinate this and be the main single point of contact for the family.  
• For those families who worry about YOT input ceasing, and where there are unmet needs active consideration should be given to exit planning, including referring to other services or agencies where appropriate.  
• Where possible children should be seen for appointments in the localities where they reside and not expected to travel long distances to appointments.  
 




2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 

2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 





? 



2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 

2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 

? 

2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 





2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 

2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 



2 
Lancashire's Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 - 1 August 2019 
 
 

