












Leicestershire County Council
Youth Justice Plan
2019 - 2020












Contents
Sections


1.	Introduction								      3

2.	Review of 2018/19 Youth Justice Plan				      4

3.	Governance							                 7

4.	Structure and outline of service                                                      8				           

5.	Partnership arrangements	                                                             9

6.	Resources						                            10    
 
7.	Future delivery and Risks						      11 	

8.	Service development						      15   
 
  9.      Risk management plan                                                                  18   











1. Introduction

The principle aim of the Youth Justice System is to prevent offending by children and young people.  Leicestershire Youth Offending Service (YOS), co-ordinates the provision of Youth Justice Services to both Leicestershire and Rutland in line with requirements set out to statutory partners in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. The YOS is a co-located multi agency team which includes staff from statutory partner agencies; the Leicestershire County Council (LCC), Leicestershire Police, the National Probation Service (NPS), and Children and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS). 

The YOS works in partnership to achieve the National Youth Justice strategic objectives which are to: 

* Reduce the number of children entering the youth justice system,
* Reduce reoffending by children in the youth justice system,
* Improve the safety and wellbeing of children in the youth justice system,
* Improve outcomes for children in the youth justice system.

Leicestershire and Rutland believe that intervention at the earliest opportunity is important to the effective delivery of the national objectives. The YOS seeks to do this by delivering a personalised approach where service delivery is aimed at meeting the needs of children and young people, whilst ensuring that account is taken regarding a child or young person's protected characteristics.  

There are significant additional resources over and above statutory youth justice provision to enable early intervention, which is support by Leicestershire County Council and its partners.

The Youth Justice Plan provides an overview of how the Leicestershire Youth Offending Service will link into partnership arrangements and deliver services in line with national requirements set out by the National Youth Justice Board (YJB). The plan provides a review of last year's plan, an overview of the YOS governance arrangements, the YOS structure and resources, local performance, identified risks, and highlights areas of development.












2. Review of Youth Justice Plan 2018/19

Review of Performance for 2018/19 

The Youth Offending Service continued to focus on five key performance areas:

* Reduction in First Time Entrants (FTE),

* Reducing the proven rate of re-offending,

* Reducing custody,

* Reduce the use of Remand,

* The number of young people in Suitable Education Employment and Training (EET).

The YOS has sustained good levels of performance during 2018/19 at a time when there are concerns about the nature of young people's offending changing due to the exploitation of young people by organised crime. Local monitoring of First Time Entrants saw April to December 2018 performance increase by 1 FTE compared to the same period in 2017/18. National data indicated that FTE performance per 100,000 young people indicated that the YOS (156) was significantly ahead of Family Group (206) and National (260). Local monitoring of the frequency rate of re-offending indicated that there had been an increase of 0.1 offences post outcome for April to December 2018 when compared to the same period in 2017/18. The National binary re-offending rate based on the 12 months January 16 to December 16 was 34.9% compared to the previous 12 months cohorts when it 35% 

The YOS rate per 1000 of population 0.09 which is significantly ahead of the Family group (0.14) and National (0.32). This is a rise of 0.01 for the same period last year.

Education, Employment and Training (EET) performance last year was 78.6% overall. However so far this year EET performance has seen performance fall. Quarterly performance was at its lowest in the first quarter (60%) but has risen each quarter since with the September to December performance at 72.4%. The rolling EET performance remains low at 63.9%. 






Review of Practice Development 2018/19


Transformation of Early Help

During 2018/19 there has been a major piece of work undertaken due the need to save £1.5 million across Early Help, of which YOS is a part but has not been required to make any financial savings. This has resulted in the restructuring of four services, creating a new Children and Families Wellbeing Service. The YOS now forms part of Youth and Justice which is the amalgamation of youth work provided by Supporting Leicestershire Families and YOS. This has resulted in significant changes for all staff involved, whilst there has been no reduction in operational staff undertaking YOS statutory and prevention work, the operating model will change significantly. All the management team have been involved in applying for new roles. All of this has created significant emotional and practical challenges for managers and staff.

The recognition by the Leicestershire County Council of the importance of early intervention has been critical to the YOS being able to retain focus on prevention and sustain its approach to reducing First Time Entrants (FTE) and Re-offending. 


Development of a Strength and Trauma Based Model of working

Children and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) received an additional £92K over 2 years from MHS England Youth Justice strand to develop Trauma informed practice across Youth Offending in Leicestershire, Leicester and Rutland (LLR).  Leicestershire and Leicester YOS have worked with CAMHS to develop this area of practice. There is now a 0.8 FTE CPN and Clinical Psychologist working with YOS staff. They have delivered the first of three phases of training for operational staff and managers, are accepting referrals from Staff, and are beginning to develop Case Formulation meetings to assist staff in intervening with young people. They will shortly begin direct work. Their Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) project has built in evaluation of outcomes as part of the project, which will be reported in 2020.

Operational Staff and Managers have received Desistance Training, and this has been followed up with Practice Development Sessions in order to help Staff begin to integrate the learning into their practice. Managers are also focused on ensuring that they see desistance factors being drawn into interventions with young people when signing off ASSET Plus. 

This is a significant shift in YOS practice, it has been well received by practitioners; but will continue to need further work to ensure that it is effectively embedded in YOS practice.





Child Criminal Exploitation

The YOS has seen numbers of young people becoming involved in drug dealing and movement for suspected or confirmed urban street gangs and organised crime groups. Some of the children have been as young as 13 years old, but the majority are 16 or 17 years old. There is increasing evidence of county line activity, some incidents of stabbing and young people being seriously harmed. 

The YOS has been working with Partners and staff to develop their understanding of how this works. The YOS is involved with the Daily and Weekly Risk meetings at an operational level, and monthly strategic CCE/CSE meetings. The YOS has played an active part in advocating for a focus on exploitation, not just Child Sexual Exploitation. This has involved work internally to look at how Children's Services responds better, and how we work effectively together. Agencies across LLR are now strategically looking at how to improve responses collectively and how to realign resources to enable this.

The Children and Family Wellbeing Service has identified the need to support children by the recruitment of additional YOS staff skilled at establishing engagement with young people most at risk. The YOT Knife Crime Group has bid for £50,000 of additional funding from the PCC to support a new knife crime intervention programme. The Kick Start Your Life (KSYL) Programme has received additional £5000 external funding from Leicestershire and Rutland Sport to continue its work. The programme has also expanded to offer Arts as well as Sports based activities to young people. KSYL helps young people to select the activity of their choice, finds somewhere for them to receive coaching or tuition, and supplies equipment to enable then to become self-supporting in the activity. This is offered to high risk of harm and offending young people within the YOS. These activities are designed to maximise engagement for hard to reach young people who are being exploited or at risk of offending.

Education Employment and Training

The YOS improved links with the Leicestershire Education Partnerships (LEP) which has helped to improve performance during 2017/18, but this improvement has not been sustained. The introduction of Academies has not helped in the delivery of the Education performance target. The Performance issues are in part because fewer young people seem to be in full time provision and not triggering the threshold for full time hours. As a result, the YOS is reviewing its practice in conjunction with the Education Inclusion Service and will feature as part of its development programme during 2019/20. 

Improvement in ASSET Plus quality

Quality Assurance checks identified the need to improve ASSET plus Quality. Operational Staff and Manages undertook significant training to improve ASSET Plus. This included specific training for managers to improve their quality assurance process to facilitate better consistency and response to ASSET quality issues and to improve feedback to staff. The training has been supported by practice development sessions on Assessment, Chronologies, consistent practice oversight (managers) and Desistance.   

3. Governance 

Leicestershire Youth and Justice is located within Leicestershire County Council's Children and Families Service. 

YOS will be located within the Youth and Justice Section of the Children and Family Wellbeing Service. Youth and Justice seeks to intervene early with children and young people who are experiencing difficulties in order to improve their outcomes as well as providing a Youth Justice provision, aligned with youth work.    

The Youth Offending Team is overseen by its Management Board (YOSMB), which meets four times a year and is chaired by the Chief Executive of Leicestershire County Council. There is high level partnership representation on the Board from Leicestershire County Council, Rutland County Council, East Leicestershire and Rutland CCG, West Leicestershire CCG, Leicestershire Partnership Trust, the National Probation Service and the Police and Police Crime Commissioner. There are good working relationships with all partners that ensure effective, integrated strategic planning and delivery of youth justice services. 
 
The vision of the YOTMB

"It is committed to work in partnership, sharing responsibilities and providing the necessary resources, to provide effective strategic oversight and direction to the Leicestershire Youth Offending Service (LYOS). Its direction will ensure that the LYOS is a high performing organisation that uses the principle of effective practice to provide high quality individualised services to children, young people, and their families; with the principal aim of preventing and reducing offending, thereby making a significant contribution to safer communities". 

The Board is committed to achieving this vision by: 

"Ensuring the co-operation of the mainstream services of the partner agencies through adequate resourcing, joint planning, shared objectives, and a commitment to work together to achieve better outcomes for children and young people." 

To assist the YOSMB in its oversight function, a proposed annual reporting cycle has been introduced. The reporting cycle is designed to enable the Board to scrutinise all aspects of YOS activity and how partner agencies support the delivery of YOS services in their own organisations. Each Board meeting receives reports on the YOS on its financial position and performance against the key indicators 

YOS proposed service delivery Reporting Schedule

* Quarter 1 - Volunteering, Workforce development and Quality Assurance. Case Example 
* Quarter 2 - Profile of young people involved with the YOS and outcomes, Safeguarding (Exploitation, LAC)
* Quarter 3 - Desistance needs of young people, Liaison and Diversion, Prevention, Case Example.
* Quarter 4 - Youth Panel, Courts, Management of High Risk of harm to others and Offending (DYO Management Oversight)
 

In addition, the board will be provided with reports on HMIP thematic inspections and Inspection, serious incidents and significant changes to practice resulting from legislation or National Guidance.  

Proposed Partner Agency Reporting Schedule

* Quarter 1 -. Substance Misuse 
* Quarter 2 - Police - Health Commissioning
* Quarter 3 - CAMHS -Public Health 
* Quarter 4 - Children's and Family Service - Education


The purpose of the partner reports is to highlight current and future partner developments relevant to YOS service delivery, which may impact on YOS Service delivery, to highlight any joint development work required or being undertaken with Youth and Justice. 


4. Structure and Outline of the Service

During 2018/19 the Youth Offending Team was part of a major transformation of the Early Help Services. This has resulted in the Youth Justice and Youth provision being brought together into a new structure called Youth and Justice. Youth and Justice now sets in the New Children and Family Wellbeing Service (Previously the Early Help Services). 

The new structure consists of two Youth Offending operational teams focused on delivering statutory pre and post court supervision, Bail and Remand, Integrated Rehabilitation and intensive Support (IRIS) and Court Services for  East Leicestershire (Charnwood Borough Council , Melton and Market Harborough District Councils  and Rutland County Council), West Leicestershire ( North West Leicestershire, Hinckley and Bosworth and  Blaby District Councils, and Oadby and Wigston Borough Council), and two Youth Teams whose focus is on the delivery of early help youth services and prevention (IMPACT -street based Anti-Social Behavior project and direct interventions to prevent offending) and some pre-court service provision. These services are also split between East and West Leicestershire. 

As part of this re-design of service delivery, Youth and Justice staff will be in their localities with other Children and Family Wellbeing Service staff and Children and Family Service Staff. The increasing complexity of cases make the importance of being able to work across services effectively and building close professional relationships with other services essential. 

High risk of harm, re-offending, and Safety and Wellbeing cases are all managed by staff who are professionally qualified, and part of Youth and Justice.

A significant feature of Youth and Justice is that the service still maintains a strong Prevention offer. This has now been broadened in the new service to include all young people in need of support. Young people are assessed, and case managed on a needs basis, having been referred either through the police/YOS Out of Court Disposal Panel (NYPD), or by schools or other agencies via the Children and Family Wellbeing Service Triage Team.

Youth and Justice has a range of services which support service delivery, CAMHS Children's Psychiatric Nurse (CPN) for facilitating mental Health assessment and referrals into CAHMS, and an Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE) project Team, (made up of Psychologist and CPN), Accommodation worker, Substance Misuse treatment specialists, Education specialists, Victim Worker, Voice worker, and Liaison and Diversion Team (Manager, CPN and Assessment worker). Staff also have access to Care Navigators to facilitate Health related referral support.

The service also has a centrally managed Community Safety Team that supports the work delivered by the locality operational staff. 

A detailed Youth and Justice Structure is provided in appendix C.


5. Partnership Arrangements

Since inspection in 2002, partnership working has been the cornerstone of service delivery. This provides a central focus for the Youth Justice Plan. 

Leicestershire YOS priorities are reflected in the Leicestershire Safer Communities Strategy Board priorities, and links have been established with the Health and Well Being and the Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership Boards.  

The performance framework for the Rutland Community Safety Strategy includes a key objective to reduce re-offending through the improved management of offenders. 
The Leicester, Leicestershire and Rutland Reducing Re-Offending Board has a sub-regional Reducing Re-offending Strategy and Plan which reflects priorities for reducing re-offending by young people.
The YOS engages at sub-regional level with the Strategic Partnership Board, the Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA), and Prevent Steering Group. At county level the YOS is engaged with the Safer Communities Strategy Board, the Rutland's Children's Trust Board, the Leicestershire Substance Misuse Board, the Leicestershire and Rutland Safeguarding Children's Board (LSCB), Knife Crime Delivery Group and local Community Safety Partnerships (CSPs). YOS priorities are reflected in these strategic arrangements and plans.  

The New Children and Families Wellbeing Service means that the early help offer is situated within a single service instead of 4, as previously. This will facilitate improved focus on a whole family approach to in youth offending's service delivery for young people at risk of offending and re-offending. This will be supported by staff working in localities and the localities management structure will be focused on ensuring this as one of their outcomes. In Rutland, Changing Lives programme seeks to provide intervention to those families across the County.

In relation to the national Prevent Strategy, there is representation on the multi-agency Channel meeting. The Channel meeting assists agencies working with vulnerable people to meet their responsibilities under the Counter Terrorism and Security Act 2015. The service has developed close links with the Leicestershire and Rutland Prevent worker introduced during 2015/16, which has supported the arrangements linked to vulnerable young people.

The YOSMB is chaired by the Chief Executive, and has senior representation from Police, Education, Children's Social Care, Police and Crime Commissioner's Office, Public Health, Health Commissioning, Rutland, and Third sector. Meetings are held 4 times a year.



6. Resources

The last 12 months has been challenging for the YOS with the Early Help facing a cut in funding of £3.8 million. The County Council recognised that cutting early intervention service may only lead to increased cost later in children's lives when they require the involvement of Statuary Services. Because of this they agreed a further £2 million to support Early Help services, which has reduced the financial impact on the YOS budget. This has enabled the YOS to continue to engage young people at the earliest opportunity via IMPACT and prevention interventions.

There has been no indication from the YJB what the Youth Justice Grant for 2019/20 will be. As a result, there is no indication of any reduction in funding, they have indicated that that the Ministry of Justice is facing a very tough budget settlement. Any cuts in YJ grant will need to funded from the YOS reserve

The structural changes in service delivery has result in some changes to how the pooled budget is represented. Children and Family Service contribution has increased by £516K, but this includes funding for Youth Inclusion and Support Panel and Youth Crime Prevention, which was previously was include in the Additional Funding and in 2018/19 amounted to £245K. The Pooled budget also includes £158K of ear marked reserve spending, which is funding for 3 IRIS and a Practice and Performance posts for 2 years.





Youth Offending Service Budget for 2019/20: Core Funding

Pooled BudgetAgencyStaffing CostsPayments in KindOther Delegated FundsTotalPolice & Crime Commissioner£91,847£91,847£77,934£169,781National Probation Service£73,764£73,764£10,000£83,764Health£70,945£70,945£47,588£118,533Local Authority:
Chief Executives
C&FS
Reserve (allocated)
Rutland
Appropriate Adult (Leic City)


£298,303
£980,597
£158,651
£70,000
£3,572
£298,303
£980,597
158,651
£70,000
3,572
YJ Grant£460,919£460,919Total£236,556£2,102,564£2,339,120

Additional Funding IMPACT£296,700Total YOS Budget  £2,635,820
7. Future delivery - Risks								         

The primary objective for partners linked to youth offending, is to prevent and divert young people from the Criminal Justice System. The risks to delivery against this overarching objective fall broadly into 3 categories:

* Failing performance against national indicators, 
* Failing to maintain quality standards leading to the increase likelihood of reoffending and more serious reoffending,
* Further reductions in funding leading to reductions in youth focused resources and services.

Performance against national and local indicators

Performance of the YOS remains positive. The last 5 years performance is compared in Appendix B. 

To place YOS performance into the national context, FTE's are measured by the amount of FTE's per 100,000 young people within the YOS region, custody rates by the amount of young people receiving custodial sentences per 1,000 young people, and reoffending rates by measuring the average number of additional offences committed by the number of young people within a cohort over a 12-month period. 

In England there are 141 youth offending services. In terms of FTE's and reoffending the YOS performance is 16th nationally and 24% lower that the YOS family group average, and within the top 20% of services in relation to custody rates.


Reoffending

Leicestershire's re-offending rate is at 34.9% for January to December 2016, and is well ahead of the family group performance of 37.5%. The family group is made up of a Youth Offending team who are similar to Leicestershire, and as a result are a good measure of overall performance.

During 2018/19 the YOS under took research into re-offending rates of BAME young people. Leicestershire has a small number of BAME young people within its offending cohort, so data was evaluated over a three-year period. It found that the frequency rate of re-offending by BAME young people is lower across all outcomes. The binary re-offending rate across all outcomes for BAME is 46% and 31% for white offenders. The data indicates that BAME offend less frequently but are 15% more likely to re-offend which is a concern. Notably none of the BAME young people went on to receive a custodial sentence. The YOS is undertaking further work to reduce the differential impact on BAME young people. The YOS is continuing to monitor these figures and focus on BAME young people entering the Youth Justice system to improve outcomes.

The YJB research in 2014 highlighted that a few young people can have a disproportionate impact on re-offending performance. The YOS internally is also was aware that its needs to ensure that internal services are actively engaged to ensure young people's needs are met.  To manage this, YOS continues to review all young people who re-offend or new cases on a monthly basis. Over recent years the YOS has become aware that a quick response to meeting the needs of young people has a significant impact on behaviour. If there are any issues that need to be resolved, actions are put in place to do so, any issues which require escalation are carried out, and if there needs to be an improved multiagency/service response; the service are asked to attend a meeting 2 weeks later.

Young people's involvement in the movement of and dealing drugs for organised crime and serious violent crime is now a significant issue for Leicestershire. During 2018/19 young people have been trafficked as far afield as London, South Wales and Liverpool. Young people have also been involved in serious stabbing incidents and Robbery. Loughborough is the area of most concern, but there is increasing evidence that other areas are also experiencing this phenomenon. This is the biggest risk to YOS reoffending performance. It is proving extremely difficult to get young people to disengage from once they are involved. During the year the YOS have been involved with the Police and other partners in identifying ways of dealing with these issues.



First Time Entrants:

Leicestershire FTE performance continues to be strong with its performance being 24% lower than the family group average. For many years the YOS has been at the forefront of reducing FTEs. As a result, it is difficult to see how much further FTE can continue to fall. The performance around FTE's is affected by several factors, including national crime trends and partner agency procedures. The involvement of serious organised crimes with young people does pose a risk to future FTE performance.

The YOS continues to exert as much influence as possible to reduce FTE still further. The YOTs focus on prevention is key to this. The IMPACT team, Schools, Police and Community Safety Teams in district and Borough councils continue to identify young people they believe are at risk of offending. The YOT prevention case load is about 25% of the overall YOT case load. Research into those young people who go on to offend indicates that where young people do offend, prevention intervention has slowed offending by at least 9 months, but this can be as much as 3 years. As a result, the YOS now intends to call all young people 6 months after the end of their preventative intervention to see if any further support is required.

The YOS Out of Court Disposal panel also remains an important part of the strategy to reduce FTEs. The panel ensures young people do not get drawn in to the Youth Justice system unnecessary, by acting as a gate keeper in relation to young people being criminalised when there is not a good rationale for doing so, and by offering prevention interventions to support young people if it is required; and will enable them not to be criminalised.

An potential risk is that the new approach to Triage with in the Children and Family Wellbeing Service identifies the right young people to intervene with.



Custody

The YJB custody performance indicates that 0.09 per 1000 young people received a Custodial sentence between October 2017 and September 2018. This remains significantly ahead of National (0.32) and the Family Group (0.14) performance. 

In relation to young people receiving custodial sentences, the YOS has had low numbers of young people receiving sentences for a number of years. There are several factors that affect rates of custody, including the quality of YOS case management around young people with complex problems. The YOS has developed improved relationships with Social Care, as the most complex cases frequently have joint YOS social care links. This ensures that the joint work is better focused, and if they come into care that placement better meets their needs. This has been particularly important were there are young people who are being exploited. The YOS management of re-offending by reviewing cases who have offended on a month by monthly basis ensures that we respond quickly to possible escalation or changing circumstance.     

The YOS has an established team of staff focused on work within the Court; who are experienced at dealing with young people kept overnight in police custody facing a high likelihood of remand into custody. The YOS has prioritised preservation of an experienced court facing team who are able to explore and introduce appropriate alternatives to custody in high risk cases. Custody numbers have rose during 2017/18 with 6 young people going into Custody. However so far this year only 2 young people have received a custodial sentence.

Young people being exploited by organised crime groups has seen two young people being remanded in Custody this year due to committing serious offences. The increase in stabbing incidents as well as serious offences, does give cause for concern for numbers of young people going into Custody.  

Education

The YOS currently employs a Specialist Education worker and an Employment and Training Specialist internally. The YOS has maintained improved links with Partners via the YOS Education Strategy meeting held monthly. This meeting highlights all young people who are not in education training and employment and focuses on developing a plan to return them into suitable provision. This area of performance for the YOS is proving challenging with performance proving to be volatile. The YOS response to young people with Speech Language and Communication is patchy. As a result, this makes YOS performance in this area vulnerable. The YOS is planning further work to strengthen its position in relation to this area of work.
 

Maintaining quality standards

The YOS seeks to improve practice by the development of a learning culture and has been developing this approach over recent years. This has led to practitioners being able to look at their practice in a more open way.   

The YOS in 2018/19 has worked to maintain quality standards by: 

* Under taking a review of Pre-Court Cases and Post Court Cases, 
* Developed improved ASSET plus sign off process to support practice quality and improvement,
* Quarterly Practice Development Training,
* Bimonthly Service meetings, 
* Monthly Supervision of staff at which cases are reviewed using a standardised format with a focus on risk. 

The Quality Assurance process identified a need to improve ASSET Plus quality, risk assessment, identification of desistence needs and improve intervention planning. 

The Children and Family Wellbeing Service will continue the focus on Quality Assurance process by having a manager and staff responsible for this area of work. The YOS, due to its specific area of specialism, has created a specialist post to undertake QA improvement work.

YOS funding
 
In 2017/18 there was an announcement of a £1.5 million saving requirement from the County Council Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS) for Early Help, which the YOS is part. In addition, there was an ending of the £2.3 million funding from the Department Communities Local Government (DCLG) which in part funded Supporting Leicestershire Families (SLF). These savings are to be achieved by 2019/20. The agreed approach to managing the funding changes is to integrate the delivery of Early Help Services. The focus for 2018/19 will be to develop a new approach to the delivery of Early Help Services. The YOS will continue to deliver statutory elements of its work but will align its work more closely within the New Children and Family Wellbeing Service ensuring effective delivery against its key outcomes. The County Council has recognised the importance of intervening early and has committed a further £2 million of its own resources for 2019/20 in order to reduce the impact of the reduction in income from central government. This has enabled the YOS to retain operational staff levels, protecting the YOS statutory work and prevention offer. The YOS is situated within the Youth and Justice Team whose focus in addition to YOS, work to support young people in families where there are concerns. This closer alignment of services should improve whole family working across the YOS statutory and Prevention caseloads.


8. Service development

Strategic Developments 

On the 1st April 2019, the YOS will be part of Youth and Justice within the Children and Family Wellbeing service. The new arrangements enable the YOS to continue to support its approach to Youth Justice, this is a significant structural change in how Youth Justice Services will be delivered and will require a significant amount of management and staff resources to embed the new working practices.

Exploitation of young people by organised crime groups and others locally, is an increasingly concerning problem. The need for a multi-agency response has been highlighted by partners locally as essential if Children and Young people are to be safeguarded. The YOS has been proactive in advocating for this and will continue to support and encourage developments in Strategy and Practice.  

The YOS in the light of HMIP inspection is reviewing it governance arrangements to make sure that they are inspection ready. The YOS has carried out a review of its inspection readiness and has identified what preparations it needs to undertake. There is a need to review and update partnership agreements as well as ensuring that policy and practice documentation will meet HMIP expectations. 

The YJB have indicated that early in 2019 they will be publishing new National Standards. The indications are that there will significant changes to the current National Standards. The YOS will need to respond to these changes once the new standards are published.


Practice Developments

Education Training and Employment (ETE) performance has not been consistent over the last 18 months; there is also a need to ensure that the YOT is able to respond more effectively to Speech, Language and Communication needs. To this end the YOS is working with the Education department to improve it response. The need to change coinciding with the changes in structure of the YOS, make this an ideal time to undertake this piece of work. 

The ACE project being undertaken with CAMHS will continue till March 2020. It is progressing well and will help develop YOS practice in relation to trauma and attachment.  Critically, it enables the YOS to have an emotional health response to young people that sit below the CAMHS threshold. The complex cases being seen by YOS frequently have multiple emotional health needs which sit below the CAMHS threshold. The project will be evaluated and hopefully this will lead to the project being supported further.

During 2018/19 the YOS began the process of updating is management information systems.  The use of Tableau software has enabled a significant step forward in the YOS ability to retrieve data from the Careworks Case Management System. The YOS now has a fully developed Case Load spreadsheet, which enables it to know the numbers of cases it is working with , who the case manager is, their risk status, timeliness of the last assessment and when the next review is due and responses to key ASSET Plus questions. Work is being undertaken so that we will be able to understand re-offending data in greater depth and enable YOS to be able to evaluate who is re-offending, and who has had new outcomes whenever it is required. These developments will enable the YOS to be able to provide a more detailed picture of the profile of young people in the YOS and there needs to support better decision making.

During 2018/19 the YOS identified, that the re-offending rate of BAME young people was less frequent but their binary re-offending rate was 15% higher than their white counter parts. The YOS will continue to monitor performance and look to adapt Its practice improve outcomes for BAME groups. 


The YOS will continue to develop Desistance practice to make sure it is consistent with the 8 domains of desistence practice. This includes building relationships which develop engagement by genuine collaborative working, engagement with young peoples wider social context, active management of diversity, addressing key "structural barriers", developing change participation and community integration, addressing issues of identity and self-worth, and constructive use restorative approaches.






Appendix A 

Risk Management

Risk management is a critical element in ensuring the delivery of key priorities and outcomes.  Risk management will be active and incorporated into our performance management framework.

*Key - Impact and likelihood receiving a score between 1 and 3 with1 representing the higher level of risk

RiskCauses (s)Consequences (s)Risk OwnerImpactLikelihoodRisk ScoreList of current controlsFurther Actions / Additional ControlsResidual ImpactResidual LikelihoodResidual Risk ScoreThe numbers of First Time Entrants (FTEs) each year will level off or increase.














* Year on year decreases in FTE numbers over the last 5 years across Leicestershire
* 
New Triage process do not pick up the right young people•Increase in the number of young people entering the CJS
* Additional stress on already limited resources
*Reductions in FTEs could result in higher re-offending rates, as those young people who do enter the youth justice system do so at a more serious level and are therefore more likely to re-offend than previously
Head of Service224
*Monitor numbers of FTEs on a quarterly basis.
* Identify areas of poorer performance and resolve issues identified in conjunction with partners.
*. Monitor the New triage process to make sure it is functioning effectively.212
Increase in offending



Exploitation of young people by organised crime leading to increase in young people being drawn into offending serious and violent offencesIncreased numbers of young people being drawn into criminal behaviour. Complex young people more likely to offend involved in serious/violent crime.Head of Service224YOS operational management team reviewing all case on a month basis of all new FTE and repeat offenders, to make sure the YOS acts quickly to meets young people's needs and changing circumstances. 

Development of ACE Project to deal with TraumaContinue to develop with partners early intervention Strategies to divert young people away from exploitation

Support the development of a pathway for exploited young people with partners and children's and Family Services

Act quickly to resolve young people who are being exploited when they go missing.

The use of Tableau data to improve knowledge of the re-offending co-hort212The restructuring of YOS service delivery
**Reductions in National and local funding

*

Loss of effective Service delivery due to organisation difficulties brought about by the changes 


Head of Service235*Project planning has been under way for 16 months Project is on target and is being actively managed

Keeping staff informed of the changes and encouraging feedback from staff so that any problems can be identified quickly
Development of a risk register for YOS service delivery.222Low level use of remand and custody not maintained*potential spike in number young people committing serious offences due to exploitation 

*Increased complexity of cases, making engagement more difficult and therefore the risk of noncompliance with Court orders
*increase cost to Local Authority to fund remand beds


*Impact on YOS and C & F resources to manage young people in custodyHead of Service235Maintain current management strategies
• Close liaison with the court

*Maintain skills within bail management

• Good use of YRO sentencing options

• Ensure reducing reoffending in high risk group of YP a strategic priority

Ensure that resources are effectively targeted to minimise any potential impact.212Risk of Harm and safeguarding risks posed by or to young people not effectively identified or managed  
*Risk not effectively managed by practitioners

*ASSET plus assessments not effectively overseen and verified

More young people exposed to Exploitation leading to then being at increased Safeguarding risk and becoming involved in serious and violent offences.*Young person commits a serious offence
*A serious incident receives significant negative media coverage
*impact on victim satisfaction and public confidenceHead of Service313*Maintaining an effective quality assurance process

*Effective management process to monitor risk of harm and vulnerability processes to ensure delivery is maintained at a high standard. 
*Ensure lessons from national and local inspections, and taken forward with YOS managers & through YOS practice development sessions
* Ensure annual training priorities & plan are linked to lessons learnt process 
Ensure that resources are effectively targeted to minimise any potential impact.212



Appendix B 

Summary of Performance 2012/13 - 2015/16 

Performance against the MOJ Indicators and the Local YOS indicator for 
2012/13 to 2017/18 to date: 

National IndicatorTarget April to Mar 2013/14April to Mar 2014/15April to Mar 2015/16April to Mar
2016/17April to March
2017/18Reduction in First time EntrantsYear on year reduction-45.7% reduction-14.0% reduction34.7% reduction+1.6%
Increase (2)
-17.6% reductionReduce the proven rate of re-offending1.131.041.250.820.91Oct- Dec17

0.06Custodial Sentences
<5%2.4%4.2%4.9%1.3%
3.2%Number of young people in suitable Education, Training and Employment80%74.1%73.7%74.2%64.5%

78.6%




* First time entrants: FTE's are young people who have received a substantive outcome which 
                               includes youth cautions (YC), youth conditional cautions (YCC) 
                               and outcomes received through the courts

* Rate of reoffending: The reoffending rate is measured by tracking all young people who 
                                 receive a substantive outcome (includes YC's, YCC's, and all court
                                 outcomes) between 1st of January and 31st of March. The reoffending
                                 of the entire cohort is monitored each quarter for a 12 month period to
                                 determine the reoffending rate.

* Custodial sentences: The percentage figure is determined by monitoring the percentage of
                                   young people who appear at court, who go onto receive a custodial
                                   sentence.

* Number of NEET: This is determined by the percentage of young people not in employment
young people        education, or training, at the end of their court order.

Appendix C 

This structure illustrates the wider Youth and Justice element of the Children and Family Wellbeing Service, which includes the YOS. 



Appendix D 

The following table shows Staffing of Leicestershire YOS(not including Youth Workers) by Gender and Ethnicity, including volunteers for June 2018.

 Ethnicity and GenderManagers StrategicManagers Operational
 Practitioners
 Administrative
 Volunteer
 Total
 
 MaleMaleFemaleMaleFemaleMaleFemaleMaleFemaleMaleFemaleWhite British1182821018482987White IrishOther White11White & Black CaribbeanWhite & Black AfricanWhite & AsianOther Mixed13114Indian9999PakistaniBangladeshiOther AsianCaribbean23133AfricanOther Black21113ChineseAny other ethnic group11Not KnownTotal1211845211215044107









Partner Signatures



Name of Chief
OfficerSignatureDateChief Executive, Leicestershire County CouncilJ Sinnott06/08/2019Director of Children and Family Services, Leicestershire County CouncilJ MooreChief Constable, Leicestershire PoliceS Cole
Head of Leicestershire and Rutland National Probation ServiceC MacleanLeicestershire and Rutland Police and Crime CommissionerW BachChief Executive, East Leicestershire and  Rutland Clinical Commissioning GroupK EnglishManaging Director, West Leicestershire Commissioning GroupC TrevithickChief Executive, Rutland County CouncilH Briggs
			

1

