 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leicester City  
Youth Justice Plan 
2019 - 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formally approved on Mon 29 July 2019 and signed by key and statutory partners of Leicester YOMB 
 
Group Members Role Signature  Steven Forbes (Chair) Strategic Director: Social Care and Education  Leicester City Council  
 
 Caroline Tote Divisional Director: Social Care and Early Help Leicester City Council Jackie Difolco 
 Head of Early Help: CCYFS Leicester City Council 
 Karen Manville Service Manager - Youth offending service Leicester City Council 
 Paul Tinsley Director, Learning & Inclusion Leicester City Council  
Sarah HancockSmith Senior Operations Manager Turning Point, Leicester   
 
 Sian Walls Superintendent, Serious Harm Reduction Unit, Leicestershire Police  Carolyn Maclean  
 Head/ Deputy Head of Leicester, 
Leicestershire & Rutland                                      
Probation Service  Bob Bearne 
 Regional Manager, Nottinghamshire & 
Leicester City Community Rehabilitation 
Company                                                             Mel Thwaites  Associate Director of Children and Families, Clinical Commissioning Group  Daxa Pancholi Head of Service: Community Safety                Leicester City Council  
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 
Part One 
	Introduction 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	08 
	Performance Overview  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	10 
	Structure & Governance 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	13 
	Resources and Value for Money 	 	 	 	 	 	 	15 
	Partnership Arrangements 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	16 
	Celebrating Success 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	17 
	Risks to Future Delivery 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	18 
	Priorities  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	18 
 
Part Two - Appendices 
	Appendix One - YOS Performance report 	 	 	             	 	19 
	Appendix Two - Young Offenders Management Board 	      	 	         42 
	Appendix Three - Leicester City YOS Profiled budget 19/20 	                     42 
      Appendix Four - Leicester City YOS Staff Structure  	 	 	 	44 
      
      Appendix Five - Summer Arts College  	 	 	 	 	 	45    
 
      Appendix Six - YOMB terms of reference 	 	 	 	 	 	46  	 
 	                                    	 
 
 	 	 	 	             	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
1.1 The aims of Leicester Youth Offending Service (YOS) are to prevent youth offending and reduce reoffending and the use of custody for children and young people. This is achieved through working in partnership to deliver services that ensure children and young people are safeguarded, the public and victims of crime are protected, and those who enter the criminal justice system are supported with robust risk management arrangements. Our aim is to intervene early to provide help and support to children and young people and reintegrate them into their local communities without further offending. 
 
1.2 This Plan supports a range of associated partnership strategies including the Leicester Early Help 
Strategy 2016-19, Leicester Children and Young People's Plan, Police and Crime Plan, the Safer Leicester Partnership Plan and delivery plans within Social Care and Education department.  
 
1.3 We are working closely with our partners in the criminal justice system to ensure resources are effectively targeted at the minority of children and young people who are repeat offenders and responsible for the majority of youth crime.  
 
1.4 We have a robust Out of Court Disposal Panel to enable the YOS to identify and intervene earlier with children and young people at risk of crime and anti-social behaviour. The process is closely monitored and a scrutiny panel oversees the decisions. A review of processes was undertaken in April 2018 to ensure the panel was robust in its decision making and to reduce any drift and delay in police referrals to the panel. The findings also highlighted a poor completion of the referrals from Police into the Out of Court Disposals Panel and work was undertaken to improve these.  
 
1.5 Arrangements for Integrated Offender Management were reviewed during a number of months in 2018 and the YOS still retain funding support from the Police and Crime Commissioner as part of the successful Deter Young Offender Strategy, which was highly regarded in the last HMIC Inspection. 
 
1.6 The YOS are active partners in the delivery of the Troubled Families (TF) Programme holding a caseload of families identified as TF. This has ensured that targeted whole family support continues to be provided to families that are open to the YOS.  In addition to the TF programme, where there are children and young people working with the YOS that require additional support, they adopt the Early Help Assessment model and become the lead professional for the family co-ordinating the agencies involved and action plan. 
 
1.7 Victim work is a key priority of the service and victims receive support from an officer dedicated to working with those impacted by youth crime and to reassure local communities, children and young people about the consequences of crime and anti-social behaviour.  
 
1.8 The YOS works holistically to support children and young people to have high aspirations in their lives and for their future.  The service works in partnership to address all the complex issues children and young people display including physical and mental wellbeing, Acute Childhood Trauma and Education attainment for example. The Service recognises the need to ensure earlier intervention has a greater impact and is working closely with the youth service to develop robust prevention packages specifically in relation to serious youth violence and knife crime.  
 
1.9 The YOS has continued to prioritise children and young people's engagement in individually tailored assessment and support programmes. The service has embedded a robust quality assurance framework to oversee assessments, pathways and planning and interventions through to outcomes. The service continues to ensure evidenced based interventions are utilised whilst working to establish more research-based practice within the service and through the creation of a group work post which will commence in April 2019.  The post will ensure appropriate referrals into group work programmes and facilitate the sessions whilst ensuring the impact is monitored and utilising accredited AQA awards to provide children and young people with certificate of achievements. The service has supported initiatives to prioritise specific offence types including knife awareness programmes and gang related offending with the aim of reducing the numbers of children and young people entering the criminal justice system for knife related offending.  The service will track the outcomes over the coming year. All young people entering our service, regardless of their offending, receive one to one intervention on knife related offending and consequences. These have been well received across the service and our partnership with the service using the funding received from the Office of the Police Crime Commissioner to create bespoke group work packages in partnership with targeted Youth Support for 2019/20.  The packages will concentrate on two distinct groups of young people targeting those at risk in a prevention project as well as those appearing on the habitual Knife Carrier list in a reducing further offending project. 
1.10 2018 was an exciting year which saw several developments including that of the bespoke Acute Childhood Trauma work at the YOS.  The commissioned work provides two practitioners at set times during the working week to train and consult with staff holding cases that have potential evidence of Acute Childhood Trauma (referred to as ACE) and how to provide support for vulnerable young people with evidence of this in their past. The outcomes are being closely monitored by Public Health England. The evidence of impact of such models has been clearly defined and it is hoped it will have far reaching outcomes for improved lives for children and young people into adulthood. It is hoped that this resource can also be used as part of the development of Childrens services response to support children and young people who are criminally exploited or at risk of criminal exploitation. 
1.11 The service designed a local response to serious case reviews within the service with the removal of the Youth Justice Boards procedures.  A new local procedure is now in place and overseen by the Young Offenders Management Board. (YOMB) This ensures all critical learning reviews are closely monitored through the board and through the Leicester children's Safeguarding board as appropriate and aligns local procedures more closely.  
1.12 The YOS continues to support children and young people's access to education, training and employment with some excellent results over the past 12 months. Targeted individual advice and guidance continues to be offered to our vulnerable cohort who are not in education, training or employment. The Connexions Service is also working with economic regeneration partners to ensure that Education, Training and Employment for children and young people supported by the YOS remain a priority as new provision is developed.  The work undertaken on Speech, language and Communication has been clearly evidenced within case work having received feedback from the voluntary training inspection visit in 2018 as well as through case file audits. 
1.13 The YOS partnership will support ongoing developments with the CSE and criminal exploitation hub that is being developed and has fully contributed to the working protocol on criminal exploitation and gang related offending. The service is leading on a multi-agency response to criminal exploitation and a referral and pathways process is being designed.  This will also ensure the right responses are made at the right time for children and young people vulnerable to exploitation. The service is also working in partnership with key agencies to develop a localised protocol to continue to reduce the over-representation of Children Looked after and care leavers within the Criminal Justice System.  Through concerted partnership work there has been a reduction in CLA open to our service but ongoing work must continue to reduce numbers further.   
1.14 The Local Authority has invested in the evidenced based Signs of Safety assessment approach to support direct work with families and case management. All staff within Childrens services including the YOS have undertaken training over the past year.  The service has identified practice leads to help embed the Signs of Safety approach in the work undertaken to continue to improve outcomes for children, young people and their families.  
1.15 In September 2018, the service launched a full organisational staff review and remodelling of services through staff and partner consultation. The review enabled the service to take the opportunity to redesign the service to respond to key priorities and recommendations from the Taylor Review and Government response, local service demands and budgetary pressures. The redesigned service will commence from 1st April 2019 and will include new pieces of work such as a wider reparation offer, groupwork programme and a court, custody and resettlement team 
1.16 The service will also embed the updated National Standards over the coming months and ensure selfassessments are completed in line with the YJB guidance and actions highlighted in future plans.  
 
2. Performance Overview  
 
2.1 The key performance indicators remain top priority for the service; preventing youth offending, reducing re-offending and the use of custody for children and young people as well as a suite of local performance indicators and a monthly dashboard of indicators for the Children's Performance Board. The impact of the YOS performance and its contribution to wider safeguarding and public protection responsibilities are monitored and reported through the local Children's Trust Board, Safeguarding Children's Board and MAPPA Strategic Board.   
2.2 The YOS has refined its performance management reporting arrangements to better improve understanding of impact and outcomes and to inform the Young Offender Management Board in response to inspection recommendations. In 2019, the service will undertake a review of the tools being used to track reoffending rates to ensure robust measures are in place and maximising resources. The Youth Justice Board has created a rag rating system for all YOS's to track the key performance indicators and these will be represented in the services performance reports. The service has also refined its quality assurance framework to align it with performance outcomes such as custody and reoffending rates.  It will also track thematic inspection topics and complete audits for an "inspection ready" approach.  
2.3 The YOS completes regular 'deep dive' analysis reports for the Young Offender Management Board on priority areas.  In a recent board meeting, an in-depth presentation was undertaken on custody rates and case examples with a focus on recommendations. A follow up board received a detailed analysis of all young people who had reoffended over a two-year period and themes and trends identified for improvement.  
2.4 The most recent quarterly performance report is attached as Appendix One: YOS Performance Report (Feb 19) to illustrate the narrative.  
 
Reducing First Time Entrants (FTE) Performance 2018/19  
2.5 There has been a sustained year on year reduction in FTEs for the last seven years. Leicester has continued to see a reduction in the number of First Time Entrants (FTE) with the rate of reduction is greater than the national rate, although it continues to be higher than the national picture.  
 
Reducing First Time Entrants (FTE) Priorities for 2019/20 
a) To further reduce the numbers of young people entering the criminal justice system, in partnership with other local agencies though more integrated and targeted youth support.   
b) Work with prevention services to develop a prevention offer to target those young people coming to the attention of police on 2 or more occasions in a six-month period in specific high youth crime neighbourhoods. This will be considered by expanding the use of volunteers prior to out of court youth cautions. By doing so children and young people will receive a short-targeted piece of work to reduce the numbers entering the out of court process, including signposting to other prevention and early intervention services.    
c) To develop a groupwork offer that will concentrate on earlier intervention for young people coming to the attention of the service or partnership.  
d) To reduce the frequency and seriousness of re-offending by first time entrants and to improve earlier identification and assessment of first time entrants, including young people subject to court orders.   
e) To continue to monitor the effectiveness of the Out of Court Disposal Panel to ensure swift, timely and appropriate interventions are put in place to reduce further offending.  A focused report undertaken by the police on the out of court disposal panel in 2018 will be revisited to see the impact it has had on reducing reoffending rates in this cohort. 
 
f) To complete a deep dive Quality Assurance focus on Out of Court disposal cases and bench mark against the thematic HMIP inspection and recommendations that are now included within the Full Inspection process. 
g) To develop a robust assessment process that meets the requirements highlighted by the inspectorate in recent inspection reports. 
h) To develop a robust referral pathway with packages of support and engagement for young people identified as of involved in or at risk of criminal exploitation. 
 
Reducing Reoffending Performance for 2018/19 
2.6 The YOS with support from partners has significantly reduced the reoffending rates of young people in Leicester over a sustained period of time.  However, more recently the performance indicator has begun to show an increase in the frequency of offending by young people in the tracked cohort and within the live reoffending tracker, which has also been seen across the country.  Therefore, the service will work hard to address this increase and has completed an audit of all cases that reoffended in the cohort tracked from 2017 and 2018 to identify areas for improvement and a realignment of resources.  
2.7 The work outlined above within section 2.6 will also contribute to the reduction of the re-offending rate in Leicester.  
2.8 The organisational review has meant that caseloads for the YOS are now comparable with other YOT and manageable based on an analysis of case load numbers. However, the complexity of cases has increased, and further ongoing upskilling is required to ensure staff are appropriately trained to work with more challenging young people with more complex needs, including those involved in gangs and county lines.  By identifying support for young people who meet the Acute Childhood trauma triggers as well as working on initiatives to support young people being criminally exploited a reduction in offending should be realised. 
 
Reducing Reoffending Priorities for 2019/20 
a) To continue to monitor the impact of the change to measuring reoffending rates over the coming year due to tracking a smaller cohort and the likelihood of bigger swings in the percentage rates of offending. 
b) To better understand effectiveness of programmes and disparity in local re-offending rates by tracking the outcomes of specific intervention packages. 
c) To design a group work offer that is robust and provides an evidence based approach to its delivery. To consider the use of the Acute Trauma team to complete pre-assessments on young people and prepare them for group work to maximise positive engagement. 
d) To reduce the frequency and seriousness of re-offending by young people known to YOS at all levels including pre- court and first tier interventions, where statistically this remains a challenge both locally and nationally. To revisit the police referral process into the Out of Court Disposal Panel. 
e) To recognise that in last year's plan it was stated that "there is likely to be an increase due to the changing in the counting rules for reoffending rates over the coming year" and this has been realised.  To ensure 
this is fully understood by responding to recommendations from deep dive audits on cases that have reoffended in the tracked cohort on a yearly basis.  
f) To prioritise and address the area of trauma and emotional trauma in the lives of young people.  All staff have been upskilled to effectively identify and respond effectively to emotional trauma.  A clear model is now being developed and a service level agreement has been drafted.  The impact of this intervention work will be closely monitored by the commissioners of the service, NHS England.  
g) Over the next few months. the service will focus on developing  a clear policy and upskill staff in the area of social media.  Strategic managers need to consider local policy frameworks for monitoring online activity in line with surveillance legislation and guidance.  This information can assist assessments being completed by staff within the service. The Safer Leicester Partnership has designed a cyber-crime sub group which now has YOS attendance to develop robust partnership responses to online crime and exploitation. To also consider embedding safety awareness sessions for all young people on social media and gaming sites.  
 
Reducing the Use of Custody Performance 2018/19 
2.9 The YOS has higher than average national rate for the use of custody although this is a relatively small cohort receiving custodial sentences in 2018-19.  There has been no deterioration in this performance.  There has been a consistent reduction in the use of custodial sentencing in previous years and this continues to be a priority area for the YOS to further reduce number entering the secure estate. 
 
Reducing the Use of Custody Priorities for 2019/20 
a) To further reduce the use of remands to youth detention accommodation and custodial sentencing for all young people including children looked after.   
 
b) To develop a protocol to ensure children and young people who are looked after, care leavers and at risk of or involved in criminal exploitation are not unfairly criminalised.    
 
c) To complete full audits on all remand and custody cases to ensure any lessons are learnt and ongoing scrutiny of these cases is in place. A yearly deep dive into custody cases will be maintained to ensure recommendations are addressed.  In December 2018 a deep dive highlighted excellent practice on resettlement cases with very few areas for improvement. 
 
d) To embed the newly designed Resettlement Policy across the service and monitor its use and impact. 
 
e) The service redesign has created bespoke court and custody officers that will, in the main hold the "at the cusp" of custody cases, into custody and resettlement.  This will provide a consistent offer to those entering the secure establishment and provide a small number of staff that develop close working relationships with the secure estate. This new project will be carefully monitored to evaluate the impact and outcomes. The Service Manager is exploring closer working relationships with the 
"local" secure estate. 
 
f) To embed a new strategy for serious organised crime and gang related offending in Leicester in partnership with the Police.  This is currently in draft with the view of establishing a new hub to respond to cases that are vulnerable to CSE, criminal exploitation, county lines and missing persons.  The multi- agency hub will respond to intelligence in real time to have the biggest impact.  
 
g) To consider and explore options for targeted recruitment for accommodation (PACE bed) for young people who have been arrested as an alternative to detention prior to appearance in court. 
 
 
 
 
Engaging in Education, Training & Employment (ETE) Performance 2018/19 
2.10 The level of ETE engagement is continuing to improve and better than the family group and regional comparators.  This places the YOS performance in the top quartile nationally for the third consecutive year. 
2.11 The high level of ETE engagement with young people known to YOS has been sustained through close partnership working with Educational Psychology, Education Welfare and Connexions Services, as well as working hard to ensure improved communication with key schools in Leicester. 
 
Engaging in Education, Training & Employment (ETE) Priorities for 2019/20 
a) To further reduce the numbers of young people who are not in full time Education, Training & Employment (NEET) and known to YOS. This will include expanding the use of accredited programmes through the group work offer providing an exit route into further education, training and employment opportunities. 
b) To improve the targeting of ETE support for high risk entrants and repeat offenders, including engagement with Educational Psychology services. 
 
3. Structure & Governance  
3.1 The YOS is positioned within the Social Care and Education Department of the Local Authority. The YOS is strategically overseen by the Head of Service for Early Help and Prevention which has a portfolio of services including the Early Childhood services, Family Support, Youth Services, Multi Systemic Therapy and the Youth Offending Service. This approach contributes to a co-ordinated whole family response supporting earlier identification of families with multiple and complex needs together with increased opportunities for more targeted work with children and families at risk of poor outcomes or involved in crime and anti-social behaviour. 
3.2 The Service Manager oversees the operational delivery of the service and partnership work under the management of the Head of Service. The Head of Service is managed by the Director for Social Care and Early Help who reports directly to the Strategic Director for Social Care and Education. Governance arrangements for YOS reside with the multi-agency Young Offender Management Board (YOMB) chaired by the Strategic Director for Social Care and Education.  
3.3 The YOMB has senior officer level representation from statutory services including Police, Health and the National Probation Service. (Appendix One) Representation is also in place from the Connexions Service, Safer Leicester Partnership and CRC. The YOMB meets on a quarterly basis where performance and finance reports are presented by the Service Manager, to inform strategic decisions and resource allocation. A strategic action plan is overseen by the YOMB and Terms of Reference have recently been refreshed.  HM Courts are kept abreast of the performance and governance through the Service Manager chairing quarterly liaison meetings with the courts. 
3.4 The Young Offender Management Board reports include quarterly analysis of performance against key national and local youth justice indicators, audit and self-assessment activity, Serious Incident reporting, National Standards audits; and quarterly YJB monitoring reports. The YOMB reviews and revises its performance management framework on a regular basis, to take into account best practice and changing local and national priorities. Ongoing strategic partnership analysis and priorities for 2018 included Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE), Children Missing and Trafficked who are involved in the criminal justice system, knife crime and gang related activity as well as county lines.  
3.5 In the last Youth Justice Plan, the Service Manager was keen to develop a Shadow Board for young people to assist in with decision making and developments of the service, or alternatively have a section within the Board whereby young people attend to talk about their experience of supervision to aid the Boards understanding of the services they were responsible for. Due to the launch of the staff organisational review, it was not possible to develop this concept. However, the department has established a participation and engagement service and the Service Manager has been working closely with the team to develop the services participation offer for 2019/20. As part of the staff organisational review, all staff were interviewed by a panel of young people that had designed a bespoke set of questions and were given equal weighting 
3.6 The Head of Service is a member of MAPPA Strategic Board and the Local Children's Safeguarding Board for reporting and monitoring lessons from Serious Incidents and Serious Case Reviews. The Director for Social Care and Early Help is the chair of the Early Help Strategic Partnership Board which is a sub group of the Leicester's Children's Trust. The Service manager deputises for the Head of Service and ensures attendance at all operation delivery groups that sit beneath the strategic boards. 
3.7 The Service Manager also holds quarterly liaison meetings with key partners and stakeholders including the Police, Courts, CAMHS, Turning Point (substance misuse provider) etc. These meetings are to be reviewed in 2019 to ensure their continued effectiveness. 
 
4. Resources and value for money  
 
4.1 The YJB Youth Justice Grant allocation focusses on innovation and service improvement and supports the annual partnership delivery plan reviewed by the Young Offender Management Board. This ensures resources continue to be prioritised in areas where there are risks to future delivery and performance.  
 
4.2 Service improvement activity in 2018/19 has been supported by the YJB through a local re-offending toolkit to provide a more detailed understanding of local re-offending rates. The Service has continued to fine tune this toolkit, with a refresh in 2019, and its use in weekly management reoffending toolkit meetings.  Attendance by the police and the Integrated Offender Manager has increased the sharing of real time intelligence for case managers to respond to reducing drift and delay in refreshing assessments and pathways and planning. A refresh of the toolkit will commence during 2019 to ensure the frequency rates are targeted more effectively by the management team.     
 
4.3 Funding contributions from statutory partners in Health and the National Probation Service are confirmed and included in the budget report. The OPCC has confirmed 2019/20 core funding for YOS and additional funding for a 0.5fte Offender Manager post. A table containing the financial, staffing and in-kind contributions made by local partners is contained in Appendix Two. 
 
4.4 The YOS has transitioned to a new Youth Justice Management Information System (Capita ONE) from the autumn of 2017 with ongoing service meetings held to address any concerns with the systems performance.  The service is still unable to use the connectivity function which is an area of concern but is a technical problem with the provider which we are in the process of addressing with the provider directly with other YOS's who have similar issues. This means that documents can't be sent through connectivity and require securely sending.    
 
4.5 The YOS has a range of secondment arrangements as follows: 
 
a) One full time equivalent (fte) post which is a 0.5 reduction in allocation  
b) Two fte seconded warranted Police Officers 
c) One fte pre-16 Education Specialist managed within the Education Welfare Service  
d) One fte post 16 Education C-ordinator and Mentor 
e) One fte Educational Psychologist (current 0.6 vacancy) 
f) One part time CAMHS Practitioner reduced from full time 
 
4.6 The YOS are continuing to work closely with the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS). In 2018, the YOS worked with the Leicester Clinical Commissioning Group and stakeholders to ensure that the local CAMHS Transformation included the support needs of children and young people known to YOS. This led to the development of a specific bid and successfully receiving funding to secure two practitioners working across LLR to offer support for the Trauma Induced work.  Staff have been trained to identify triggers and how to work with young people that display acute childhood trauma. Additional YOS resources include a named lead and dedicated Education, Training and Employment Personal Advisor surgery from the Connexions Service.   
 
4.7 The YOS has a diverse workforce that reflects the diversity of the local communities that it serves. The entire YOS workforce is employed on a permanent basis, apart from one agency employee covering reception duties due to a current freeze on recruitment within business support. As part of the service redesign an Equality Impact Assessment was completed highlighting an underrepresentation of female employees in all parts of the service apart from management. This is an under representation in comparison to the demographic of our workforce. This will be closely monitored to ensure no detrimental impact on front line service delivery specifically towards our female service users that may require female practitioners. However, we do not feel this will be problematic as the local demographic of the cohort of children and young people we are working with are predominantly male which is reflective of our workforce.  
 
4.8 The YOS works with a wide range of volunteers reflecting the diversity of Leicester's communities in relation to race, religion and belief. A structure chart including the full YOS staffing establishment is contained in Appendix Three.   
 
5 Partnership Arrangements 
5.1 The YOS is fully integrated into local partnership planning arrangements for both children and young people and criminal justice services. There are regular joint meetings with key partners including the Police, Courts, Health (Public Health and Clinical Commissioning Group) and Probation (NPS) to support the delivery of shared strategic priorities.  
5.2 The Head of Service for Early Help and Prevention or YOS Service Manager is represented on/or responsible for the following key strategic partnerships: 
6 Leicester Children's Trust Board (LCTB) 
7 Local Safeguarding Children's Board (LSCB) 
8 Early Help Strategic Partnership Board 
9 Safer Leicester Partnership (SLP) 
10 Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements Strategic Board (MAPPA) 
11 Children and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) Multi Agency Partnership 
12 Edge of Care Interventions Board 
13 Prevent Steering Group and Channel Panel 
14 Operational delivery MAPPA Meetings 
15 Substance Misuse Partnership Board  
16 Level 2 and 3 Mappa meetings 
17 Early Help Assessment Partnership Allocations Hub  
18 CSE, Missing and criminal exploitation meeting 
5.3 The YOS is working in partnership with the Youth Service to deliver knife awareness programmes for two distinct groups of young people aged 11+, those whom are known to carry knives and those that are at risk of becoming knife carriers.  This work is being funded by the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner (OPPC) youth crime prevention programmes and it focuses on preventing re-offending by 
high risk entrants to the youth justice system and repeat high risk offending.                                                    
5.4 This includes jointly commissioned work with local voluntary sector youth service providers that support national indicator performance and outcome measures jointly monitored by the OPCC. The work has focused, more recently, on knife crime and related offending.  Specific programmes have been delivered 
in partnership to reduce the number of knife related offences across the city. It is hoped this work will continue over the coming year. 
5.5 Accommodation is included as part of all intervention planning by case managers for any child or young person made subject to a custodial sentence or remanded to Youth Detention Accommodation. Every child or young person who is made subject to a custodial sentence or made subject to Youth Detention Accommodation is allocated a Youth Advocate. The focus of the advocate work is to deliver and enable access for support with health, family, education, training and employment and accommodation.  
5.6 All children and young people subject to custodial sentences are reviewed by a multi-agency panel, called the Case Management and Diversity Panel which is chaired by the Service Manager or Team Manager.  Agencies represented include Connexions, CAMHS, Substance Misuse and Parenting Workers to ensure that children and young people's safeguarding, risk of harm, welfare and mental health needs are appropriately assessed. Parenting support is provided to all children and young people in custody and their families throughout the custodial sentence to plan and support reintegration into the community.  Other key professionals will be invited depending on the specifics of each case being presented to the panel.  
 
6 Celebrating success 
 
6.1 There are a number of areas to be proud of and celebrate over the previous year's achievements. The following as just some of the examples of success: 
 
a) The service is developing a robust offer to children and young people who have experienced Acute Trauma (ACE) in their lives and how to support young people with a history of trauma. 
 
b) The service delivered its first Summer Arts college in over 10 years with all 10 participants completed the programmes and receiving accredited arts awards. The service was thrilled with this outcome and received an award of excellence. All ten young people have gone on to secure education, training and employment opportunities and have not reoffended to date. The service will be running another arts college this summer and is excited to build on an already successful model. (Refer to Appendix 4 for photos from the summer arts) 
 
c) The service has worked in partnership to develop some excellent packages for children and young people carrying knives or as preventative programmes.  The service commissioned Street Doctors to complete first aid session with young people including those in care.  
 
d) Continual improvements in a number of our performance indicators including the outstanding performance regarding the number of children and young people attending full time Education, Training and Employment.  
 
e) Continuing to offer a good service to our service users and ensuring the voice of our service users is heard throughout assessments and delivery of interventions.  
Feedback quotes from children and young people completing reparation   

 

 
7 Risks to future delivery  
7.1 A challenge for the YOS is to maintain continuous improvement in the context of any proposed national changes to the Youth Justice System arising from the Taylor Review and the Youth Justice Board changes. Additional risks to future service delivery arise from reduced government and partnership funding.    
7.2 The YOS has undergone a full-service redesign primarily due to funding reductions.  This will mean an increase in case load numbers for individual staff and this will have to be closely monitored. 
7.3 The service has responded to some significant changes/challenges over the past year and there needs to be a period of stability for the service.  The updated national standards require careful compliance and monitoring to ensure adherence. 
7.4 The YOS is working with strategic partners through the YOMB to ensure that national changes to the criminal justice system through Police, HM Courts and Probation services are managed appropriately and address risk, public protection and safeguarding priorities for children and young people. 
7.5 The YOS will continue to produce a yearly strategic and operational action plan overseen by the partnership Youth Offender Management Board. 
7.6 The service will be moving to new premises towards the end of June/July which is the first move since its creation. This will be an ideal opportunity to rebrand and relaunch the new service in its new accommodation.  It will also require a change of delivery style with staff working more widely and consistently in local communities.    
 
8 Priorities for 2019/20 
8.1 Priorities for the Leicester YOMB Partnership for 2019-20 are as follows: 
* To embed and monitor the new YOS model of service delivery post reconfiguration. This will include a rebranding of the refreshed service and governance arrangements. 
* To further improve the quality of assessments and effectiveness of YOS interventions to reduce reoffending. 
* To ensure that children and young people who are known to YOS as children in need or in need of protection including from child sexual exploitation, criminal exploitation are identified, safeguarded and their cases escalated where appropriate. The YOS to continue to be a core panel member for the newly designed exploitation meetings and to take the lead of on the development of a robust referral pathway for children and young people recognised as being exploited.  
* To develop a prevention offer in partnership to prevent offending and further reduce reoffending by children and young people.  
* To develop a volunteer, offer for children and young people receiving Community Resolutions.  
* To continue to reduce the number of Children Looked After who enter the criminal justice system by developing a local protocol and to further reduce the number of children and young people subject to remands and custody. 
* To monitor the impact of the Acute Childhood trauma work within the service and support its further use within criminal exploitation initiatives as well as group work programmes.  
* To continue to support the partnership knife crime delivery group as it develops over the coming year as well as its close links to criminal exploitation developments.   
* To embed the updated national standards within the service and complete a full self-assessment later in the year. 

 
Appendix One - YOS Performance Report 
 
PAPER F 
 
Leicester Youth Offending Service:  
Performance Report to Management Board Meeting Feb 2019 

The following report is based on the Youth Justice Board (YJB) YOT Data Summary released in Sep 2018 and is therefore the latest data available April September 2018 (QUARTER 2).  The reporting periods for each measure are shown in the table below: 
Measure Reporting period First Time Entrants Jul 17 -Jun 2018 Reoffending Three-month Cohort Oct 2016 - Dec 2016 12 Month Cohort Jan 16 - Dec 16 Use of Custody Oct 17 -Sep 2018 Education, Training & Employment July -Sep 2018 Accommodation July -Sep 2018 Executive Summary Section 1: 
Overall the Youth Offending Service has had the following performance updates since the last reporting period: 

group selected**WalesYOTRegionPCC areaYOT FamilyComparison YOTEnglandIndicators
FTE PNC rate per 100,000 of 10-17 population  **Good performance is typified by a negative percentagePCC area     Leicester City Data Summary April - September 2018
	Draft v 1-2	Leicester City	East Midlands	Leicestershire	YOT family*	YOT comparison 	England & 	England

334239217345325
260262Jul 17 - Jun 18

359306248416381
314317Jul 16 - Jun 17
percent change from selected baseline	-7.1%-21.9%-12.6%-17.0%-14.9%-17.1%-17.2%Use of custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 population  **Good performance is typified by a low rateEngland
0.630.260.270.590.53
0.320.32Oct 17 - Sep 18

0.910.380.360.780.69
0.410.41Oct 16 - Sep 17
change from selected baseline
Reoffending rates after 12 months - Three month cohorts-0.28-0.12-0.09-0.20-0.16-0.09-0.09
3.623.753.483.373.52
3.983.97Reoffences per reoffender Oct 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period)

3.003.392.903.733.74
3.883.87Reoffences per reoffender Oct 15 - Dec 15 cohort
change from selected baseline20.7%10.6%20.0%-9.6%-5.9%2.4%2.6%
44.6%40.4%40.4%36.8%37.9%
40.4%40.0%Binary rate - Oct 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period)

40.5%36.2%37.2%43.0%43.0%
41.8%41.4%Binary rate - Oct 15 - Dec 15 cohort
percentage point change from selected baseline
Reoffending rates after 12 months - Aggregated quarterly cohorts4.1%4.2%3.2%-6.2%-5.2%-1.4%-1.4%
3.623.703.653.523.63
3.903.88Reoffences per reoffender Jan 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period)

3.313.453.513.603.64
3.733.72Reoffences per reoffender Jan 15 - Dec 15 cohort
change from selected baseline9.3%7.2%3.9%-2.2%-0.5%4.6%4.3%
41.9%39.5%38.7%39.2%39.6%
41.5%41.2%
38.5%36.8%36.9%42.4%41.6%
42.5%42.1%Binary rate - Jan 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period) Binary rate - Jan 15 - Dec 15 cohort
percentage point change from selected baseline	3.5%	2.7%	1.8%	-1.0%	-0.9%
*Review family **Select the list and data on desired YOTs 
	'New YOT 	on Comparison 
	Family' tab	YOT tab
	15
8
 

 
*YOT new family group: 
(Slough, Wolverhampton, Sandwell, Hounslow, Hillingdon, Blackburn with Darwen, Coventry, Southampton, Birmingham, Walsall) 
 
 
1. First Time Entrants  
 
1.1 First Time Entrants are young people who receive a youth caution/conditional caution or court conviction for the first time within the period. The findings for the period 2014-2018 are as follows:  
 
a. The FTE for Leicester YOS have been declining consistently over the period from June 14 - June 18.  
b. Year on Year the decline in FTE's has not matched that of national and regional figures which have been declining at a faster rate. c. The increase or decline is influenced directly by our police partners.  
 
 
2. Reoffending  
2.1 The data for this indicator comes from the Police National Computer (PNC) and is published by the MoJ. The 12-month reoffending rate for the Oct 16 - Dec 16 cohort is presented and is the latest available data. The cohort consists of all young people who received a pre-court/court disposal or released from custody during that date range.   
 
2.2 There is slight decrease in reoffending rates during the period of Oct 2016 -Dec 2016 cohort (latest period from PNC) in terms of both the binary and frequency reoffending rates.  However, the binary rate for Leicester is now the highest amongst the new YOT family group.  
 
3. Custody 
3.1 The indicator uses case level data. Latest data is up until Q2 Jul -Sep 2018 and is the number of custodial sentences in the period given to young people (with a local residence aged under 18 years on the date of their first hearing related to the outcome. Successfully appealed sentences are discounted). If a young person was given the same type of custodial sentence on the same day to be served concurrently or consecutively, they will only be counted once. 
This 	data 	is 	also 	presented 	as 	a 	rate 	per 	1,000 	young 	people 	in 	the 	10 	to 	17 	local 	general 	population.   
 
3.2 In terms of the use of custody Leicester's rate has reduced considerably over the last two years (2016/17 and 2017/18) although it remains above national and regional averages which also continue to reduce steadily (but noting that Leicester had a higher baseline to reduce from).  The local rate for Leicester is still one of the highest when compared to the new YOT family group. 
4. Education, Training and Employment.   
4.1 Leicester is continuing to perform better than the regional and national averages for both school-age and above school-age young people.  This has improved quarter on quarter and something the service is very proud of. 
**(Please note the information that is displayed in the latest YJB (Leicester City Data summary April - September 2018 regarding the Education and 
Accommodation figures is incorrect. This has been reported to YJB and awaiting a response.) 
 
5. Accommodation. 
5.1 For Accommodation Leicester's performance remains better than the regional and national averages on all three post-court tiers of the youth justice system.   
**(Please note the information that is displayed in the latest YJB (Leicester City Data summary April - September 2018 regarding the Education and accommodation figures is incorrect. This has been reported to YJB and awaiting a response.) 
6. SUMMARY OF KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
 
FTE PNC rate per 100,000 of 10-17 population Jul 17 -Jun 18: Rate of 334 per 100,000.  (Number = 112 young people) Jul 16 -Jun 17: Rate of 359 per 100,000.  (Number = 119 young people) Decrease by 7.1% GREEN  
  Re-offending Rates after 12 months - Three months cohort    Frequency rate: Oct -Dec 16 Cohort (latest period) = 1.62 Reoffences/offender    (65 young people in cohort and 105 re-offences)    Frequency rate: Oct -Dec 2015 cohort (previous period) = 1.21 Reoffences/offender ( (84 young people in cohort and 102 re-offences)     Increase of 0.41 offences per offender RED  Binary rate: Oct -Dec 16 Cohort (Latest period) = 44.6% (65 young people in cohort and 25 reoffenders committing average of 3.62 offences per re-offender)    Binary rate: Oct -Dec 15 Cohort (Previous period) = 40.5% (84 young people in cohort and 34 r  reoffenders committing average of 3.00 offences per reoffender) Increase of 4 % RED   
Use of Custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 population Oct 17 -Sep  2018: Rate of 0.63 per 1,000.  (21 custodial sentences) Oct 16 -Sep  2017: Rate of 0.91 per 1,000.  (30 custodial sentences) Reduction of   45% (GREEN)  
 
6.1 Having met the Youth Justice Board regional representative in November the service has been informed that the YJB will now be rag rating YOS's based on their quarterly data as follows; 
a. RED - concerns regarding performance which will be discussed with the YOS to look at factors and trends.  A letter could be sent to the Chair of the YOMB and YOS and If the issue continues without any exceptional issues this could be escalated to the Ministry of Justice. b. RED/AMBER - concerns but will be monitored and overseen to consider any actions required. 
c. AMBER/GREEN - some concern but generally won't be closely considered unless continues to deteriorate. d. GREEN - positive and no concerns 
 
6.2 The Service Manager will oversee the rag ratings and include any risks or concerns, in future, into the improvement action plan.  The above process is new and the YJB are still looking at how this will work in practice and there may be further changes.  At the time of writing the service had not received their indicative rag rating scores for this reporting quarter.  
Detailed analysis Section 2 
1. Preventing young people entering the youth justice system  
 
Indicator Direction travel of Peer comparison Overall performance First-time entrants to the youth justice system Increase Still above national and 
regional  
 RED/AMBER  
1.1 The measure is the rate per 100,000 local youth population who enter the youth justice system by receiving a caution or a sentence. There were 112 firsttime entrants (FTEs) to the youth justice system in Leicester in year ending Jul 17- June 18, equivalent to a rate per 100,000 youth population of 334.  This compares to 119 young people in the year ending Jul 16 -June 17.  This is a 7.1% decrease in numbers. The local rate remains above the average for the Leicestershire PCC area, Midlands region and England. This is illustrated in the chart below. 
 


 
 
 
 
The chart below shows how Leicester's FTE rate over the last 4 years compares with the new YOT Family Group.  
 

 
This shows that the rate for Leicester has reduced from 491 per 100,000 in 2014 to 334 in 2018.  
 
1.2 The following can be highlighted from the above graphs; 
a. The FTE for the Leicester YOS have been declining on a consistent basis over the period from June 14 - June 18 - Leicester YOS has continued to sustain a decline.  
b. Year on Year the decline in FTE's has not matched the same consistent rate of fall in other areas.   Leicester YOS needs to work closely with partners, specifically the police, to address this. 
 C. The service needs to contact the new Family YOS's that have reduced their FTE at a quicker rate to share best practice examples.  The Data Officer will make contact prior to the next quarterly report and consider options available to the service.  
d. A key part of the strategy for reducing first time entrants is the triage panel which is a meeting between the Leicester City and Leicestershire YOTs with the Leicestershire Police to share information and agree which young people can safely be diverted from the formal youth justice system.  The Leicester YOS can offer voluntary interventions with young people who might otherwise have to be brought into the formal youth justice system and be given a criminal record.  
The panel is frequently observed to ensure its effectiveness with a recent visit by the Head of Service. 
e. A scrutiny board checks the decision-making process of the panel and continues to positively endorse the decisions.  However, a close look at prevention offers prior to entering the out of court disposal process is needed to reduce the flow of young people coming into the First Time Entrants route.  There are several initiatives around the country that are reducing numbers coming into the out of court disposal system which need to be explored but requires resourcing.   
2. Reducing reoffending 
 
Indicators Direction of travel Peer comparison Overall performance Reoffending. 
The indicators are the proportion of cohort members reoffending within 12 months (binary rate) and the average number of further offences committed (frequency rate). Decreased compare to last quarter  Slight decrease in reoffending during the period of Oct 16 -Dec 2016.   Remains high and still 
RED  
2.1 Young people receiving a youth justice disposal in a 3-month period are tracked via PNC for the subsequent 12 months to see if they reoffend.  There is an additional 6-month time-lag to allow for criminal proceedings to go through.  The performance data is therefore only available 2 years after the activity which is being measured occurred.   
**(The binary rate is the percentage of young people in the 12-month cohort who have reoffended within 12 months of entering the cohort. The frequency rate is the number of further offences divided by the number of cohort members (or the average number of offences committed by each cohort member)). 
 
2.2 The measure has changed and is now based on a 3-month cohort (i.e. membership is all young people receiving a disposal during a 3-month window) rather than a 12-month cohort as previously.  It is still based on reoffending over the following 12 months.   
 
(NOTE: The effect of the change is that there is likely to be more fluctuation from quarter to quarter because cohorts are much smaller, and a fewer persistent offenders dropping into or out of the cohort can make a bigger difference).   
 
2.3 The chart below compares Leicester's binary reoffending rate with the averages for the Leicestershire PCC area, the Midland region and England over the last 5 cohort periods. 
 

 
2.4 The latest binary rate for cohort (Oct 2016 - Dec 2016)   for Leicester is 44.6% is decreased by 4.6 % on the previous cohort (Jul 16 - Sep 16), and 4.1% higher than for the same period the previous year (Oct 2015 -Dec 15).   
 
2.5 There is a slight decrease with the Oct - Dec 2016 cohort.  However, as pointed out earlier, there are likely to be greater fluctuations from cohort to cohort when the cohorts are smaller.   
 
 
2.6 The chart below shows how Leicester's binary reoffending rate over the last 5 cohorts compares with the new YOT family Group.  


2.7 The Leicester re-offending has increased after three consecutive reductions in reoffending rates and has now increased in the last two quarters (Jul 16Sep 16 and Oct 16 -Dec 16) amongst the comparator areas.  
 Re-offending rate for Leicester has gone up in Oct -Dec 2016 by 4.1%.  
 The re-offending rate for Oct - Dec 16 was 44.6% (65 young people) when compared to same period Oct -Dec 2015 which was 40.5% (84 young people)  
 The cohort size has reduced by 19 young people. 
 On average young people are committing 3 offences per re-offender in Oct -Dec 2015 and 3.62 offences per re-offender in Oct -Dec 2016. 
 The binary rate has decreased but the re-offending rate remains high 
 
2.8 Although the overall trend in our family group has seen a fall in re-offending it is important to understand that the actual small size of the cohorts leads to dramatic changes.   Given the volatility of the smaller cohorts the changes in rates between cohorts vary considerably depending on which base-line cohort is used.  
 
2.9 The following measures are being considered or developed to ensure re-offending rates are monitored and effectively reduced;  
 The service has been completing a deep dive audit report on two different cohorts (July 2017 - Sep 2017) and (Jan 2018 - March 2018) cohort. 
 This has been shared with clear recommendations for improvements to positively impact on reoffending rates going forward. (Appendix E) 
 
 
 

 
**(Leicester is now towards the middle of the top quartile nationally for binary reoffending -39st out of 137 YOTs 
 
 
2.10The chart below shows Leicester's position nationally for the frequency reoffending rate (the average number of further offences per cohort member):  
 

 
**(This puts Leicester in 39th place). 
 
2.11 Over the past 2 years the YOS has been taking actions to improve reoffending performance by using the live tracking tool (YJB design) to take a strategic overview of the whole cohort and ensure the right actions are taken for the right young people at the right time.  
 
2.12 By conducting local tracking of those young people entering the local cohort we can get a more up-to-date indication of local performance.  The chart below uses locally collected data for the January - March 2018 cohort (2 cohorts later) which is still not complete, and compares it with the latest official PNC data. 
 

 
2.13 This shows that both the binary and frequency rates have reduced.  It should be emphasised, however, that the blue bars reflect locally collected data, not official data.  The actual numbers are: 68 young people, 13 of whom reoffended, committing a total of 49 further offences between them. These young people still haven't completed the 12 months of re-offending tracking cohort. Therefore, the binary rate and frequency rate will change as these young people complete 12 months tracking period. The emphasis needs to be on the number of offences being committed by a small cohort of young people. This will have examined through the re-offending live tracker.  
 
3.Reducing the use of custody 
 
Indicator Direction of travel Peer comparison Overall performance Custodial sentences.  The indicator is the rate per thousand local youth population sentenced to custody Reducing Still higher than regional & national averages but now close to the average amongst the most similar YOT areas  GREEN/AMBER  
3.1 The custody rate is measured by the number of custodial sentences per 1,000 local 10-17 youth population.   
 
3.2 Custody rates for the last 4 years for Leicester, Leicestershire PCC area, the Midland region and for England are shown in the chart below. 
 

 
3.3 It can be seen that in 2015/16 Leicester had a rate well above those for the Leicestershire PCC area, the Midland region and England, but in 2017/18 the gap has narrowed considerably.  The national, regional and Leicestershire PCC area rates have all reduced over the last year.  Leicester's rate is now only marginally higher than the regional and national rates.  Although Leicester has taken measures to reduce custody rates, some offences have a high severity rate that means the court has no alternative than to sentence to custody.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4The chart below shows how Leicester compares with the new YOT family group areas in use of custody. 
 

 
3.5 This shows that Leicester has returned to the middle of the group in terms of the use of custody, and the rate is now lower than the group average.  The rate for Leicester has more than halved over the past five years which is encouraging. 
 
3.6 In terms of actual numbers there were 21 young people sentenced to custody in from Oct 2017 - Sep 2018 as against 31 young people for Oct 2016 - Sep 2017.  
 
3.7 A new Resettlement Policy was written and launched this year and an audit of all custody cases over a three year period was undertaken and findings reported in the Decembers Quality Assurance report (Appendix D) the results were encouraging. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.Young people in Education, Training and Employment (at the end of their order) 
 
4.1 The measure is the proportion of young people who are in receipt of full-time education, training or employment (ETE) at the end of their YOT disposal.  
4.2 The chart below shows how Leicester performed compared to the region and England in the period April 2017 to September 2018. It illustrates that in terms of both school-age and above school-age young people Leicester performed far better than the average for the Midlands and England 

4.3 In terms of Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) a total 6 out of 47 young people in this cohort had an Education, Health & 
Care Plan (EHCP). 5 out of the 6 were attending full-time provision (1 was NEET) 
 
5.Young people in suitable accommodation at the end of their YOS intervention 
 
5.1The chart below shows the proportion of young people who were in suitable accommodation at the end of their YOT intervention in Leicester in the period April 2017 to September 2018 compared with the average for the Midlands region and England: 

 
5.2 This illustrates that in Leicester all those completing 1st tier disposals and all those leaving custody were in suitable accommodation. One young person completing a community disposal was not in suitable accommodation due to sofa surfing.  This is far above the regional and national averages for young people being in suitable accommodation at the close of their order, whether that is a 1st tier, community or custodial disposal.  This is particularly encouraging for young people being resettled from custodial establishments.  Not having suitable accommodation is a key risk factor for young people especially when leaving custody.  
5.3 Although the statistics are encouraging we do have presenting issues around suitable placements for our young people including when young people are being resettled into the community.  This will continue to be an area for development with our partners, including SCS. 
6.Disproportionality 
 
6.1The YJB will be completing a piece of research looking at what has occurred since the publication of the Laming report.  In Leicester a significant piece of work has been undertaken with residential homes and police on the criminalisation of children looked after and this continues to be a priority area for Leicester City council and key partners (see report appendix C) 
6.2 Locally, Leicester and Leicester YOS and the courts have joined up as part of the joint court liaison meetings to develop a panel that scrutinises the decision-making processes of the YOS and courts paying specific attention to disproportionality.  The panel is hoped to be trialled in April 2019 with the terms or reference being worked up in partnership currently. 
6.3 The service currently has 19 Children Looked After open to the service which continues to be a reduction on previous years, averaging approximately 28-30).  This is encouraging after a significant amount of partnership work has been dedicated to this with an ongoing scrutiny of the Top 10 most risky LAC cases being presented in partnership with Social Care.   
 	 	 
7. Live cases 
7.1 Appendix B highlights data for the City Youth Offending Service with cases as of 1st Jan 2019.  The graphs highlight the following; 
 Cases open to the YOS = 109 - (93 Males - 15 -Females)   
 13 - CIN 
 16 - LAC 
 6 - EH  
 7 - CSE 
 6- MAPPA - (Cat 2 -level 1) this remains consistent year on year.  
 29 - NEET 
 53 - Young people in the cohort are on a Referral Order which continues to be the largest disposal 
 71 - young people are between the age of 15-17 which is reflected nationally.  
 65 -Young people with average gravity score of 3 
 38 - young people with Knife crime outcome which is an increase and will be closely monitored with new initiatives being developed utilising PCC funding in partnership with the Youth Service.  
 Appendix F Turning Point report - highlights the increase in referrals to Turning Point and young people into treatment.  
 
8.In summary, the following recommendations are proposed 
 
8.2 First time entrants 
a) To monitor the Out of Court Disposal Panel process and ensure cases are being audited through QA mechanisms and a locally dev ised assessment tool is implemented by April 2019. 
b) Police Community Resolutions to be examined and new approaches considered, to reduce the numbers of First Time Entrants.  For example, in other authority's local arrangements with the police for young people that encounter them on 2 or more occasions, in a 6/1 2-month period, get referred to the YOS for assessments and sign posting.  The youth crime bid, if successful, would work with these criteria to address those on the cusp of offending. 
c) Data Officer to contact YOT family groups to consider looking at areas of best practice specifically in relation to FTE and reoffending initiatives.   
8.2 Re-offending  
 	To make the following changes to the Live tracker tool: 
a) Better use of QA processes in line with the live tracker - to review the ASSET PLUS and the pathways and planning specifically to consider why volume of offending continuing 
b) To analyse the trends and themes of offending - by outcome type, age, gender and report through the Performance Board dashboard.  
c) Look at the patterns of re-offending by young people and any specific issues in relation to case management - to target support in supervisions and deep dive QA reports.  
d) Re-fresher training for case managers on emerging themes from QA's and live-tracker intelligence. 
e) Revisit the types of Interventions available and used against the type of offences.  To ensure evidence-based practice is identified and delivered on.  
8.3 Custody 
a) Targeting training with the courts and continue to track PSR proposals and outcomes in court to check courts confidence of the YOS.  Congruence rates continue to be high and no issues found. 
b) Oversee bail packages put forward and the number of ISS recommendations by case managers. To review and grow the ISS offer. 
c) To develop the court and resettlement project to improve court and custody outcomes.  
 
8.4 Other areas to include 
a) Track progress of court/YOS panel meetings next year and its impact. 
b) Highlight case studies that have had good outcomes and where improvements were required and how the partnership can support. 
c) To examine the low engagement rate for young people referred to Turning Point. To put in measures to improve engagement rates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leicester City Data Summary April -June 2018 
 
YOT comparison 	*Review family 	**Select the 

YOTRegionPCC areaYOT FamilyComparison YOTEnglandIndicators
FTE PNC rate per 100,000 of 10-17 population  **Good performance is typified by a negative percentagePCC area
334239217345325
260262Jul 17 - Jun 18

359306248416381
314317Jul 16 - Jun 17
percent change from selected baseline	-7.1%-21.9%-12.6%-17.0%-14.9%-17.1%-17.2%Use of custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 population  **Good performance is typified by a low rateEngland
0.630.260.270.590.53
0.320.32Oct 17 - Sep 18

0.910.380.360.780.69
0.410.41Oct 16 - Sep 17
change from selected baseline
Reoffending rates after 12 months - Three month cohorts-0.28-0.12-0.09-0.20-0.16-0.09-0.09
3.623.753.483.373.52
3.983.97Reoffences per reoffender Oct 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period)

3.003.392.903.733.74
3.883.87Reoffences per reoffender Oct 15 - Dec 15 cohort
change from selected baseline20.7%10.6%20.0%-9.6%-5.9%2.4%2.6%
44.6%40.4%40.4%36.8%37.9%
40.4%40.0%Binary rate - Oct 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period)

40.5%36.2%37.2%43.0%43.0%
41.8%41.4%Binary rate - Oct 15 - Dec 15 cohort
percentage point change from selected baseline
Reoffending rates after 12 months - Aggregated quarterly cohorts4.1%4.2%3.2%-6.2%-5.2%-1.4%-1.4%
3.623.703.653.523.63
3.903.88Reoffences per reoffender Jan 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period)

3.313.453.513.603.64
3.733.72Reoffences per reoffender Jan 15 - Dec 15 cohort
change from selected baseline9.3%7.2%3.9%-2.2%-0.5%4.6%4.3%
41.9%39.5%38.7%39.2%39.6%
41.5%41.2%
38.5%36.8%36.9%42.4%41.6%
42.5%42.1%Binary rate - Jan 16 - Dec 16 cohort (latest period) Binary rate - Jan 15 - Dec 15 cohort
percentage point change from selected baseline	3.5%	2.7%	1.8%	-1.0%	-0.9%
'New YOT 	on Comparison 
Family' tab	YOT tab
	15
8
 

 (Cases open as of 1st January 2019) 
 
 
 
 

 
Cases on YOS: Re-Offending Toolkit
SepOctNovDecJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecJanCases on YOS Toolkit126123113123128126126122122128128107120117108of which open to EH231226 
Appendix Two 
 
Leicester City YOS - Young Offender Management Board (YOMB) 2019/20 Membership (terms of reference included as appendix Six) 
 
Group Members Role Steven Forbes (Chair) Strategic Director: Social Care and Education  Leicester City Council Caroline Tote Divisional Director: Social Care and Early Help Leicester City Council Jackie Difolco 
 Head of Early Help: CCYFS Leicester City Council Karen Manville Service Manager - Youth offending service. Leicester City Council Julia Conlon Head of Service: Early Help Specialist (Connexions & EWS), Leicester City Council Andrea Knowles Operations Manager 
Turning Point, Leicester  Sian Walls Chief Inspector  
Local Policing / Crime and Intelligence Directorate Leicestershire Police Carolyn Maclean or 
Michael Hopkinson as deputy Head/ Deputy Head of Leicester, Leicestershire & Rutland                                                               
Probation Service Bob Bearne Regional Manager, Nottinghamshire & Leicester City Community Rehabilitation Company    
                                                                                  Mel Thwaites  Associate Director of Children and Families, Clinical Commissioning Group 	 Susan Walker  Head of I & E Midlands Youth Justice Board  Manjora Bisla Accountant, Leicester City Council Clare Mills Public Health Commissioner, Leicester City Council Daxa Pancholi Head of Service: Community Safety, Leicester City Council Jasbir Sanghera Performance and Administration Team Leader, Leicester City Council  
 
Appendix Three 

N.b This is based on the assumption of same levels of funding being provided. 
 

	Four	 	 	 	 
 
YOS service Structure Chart  
 
 

Five - Photographs from the Summer Arts Project  
 
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Six - YOMB terms of reference  
1. Background 
 1.1 Youth Offending Services were established nationally in 2000. Performance and standards of YOS's nationally are overseen by the Youth Justice Board (YJB). The YJB stipulates that each YOS must be overseen by a management board. The YJB provide guidance in relation to effective governance by Boards, and the key points can be summarised as follows: 
 
a) the management board should provide strategic direction with the aim of preventing offending by children and young people. 
b) all statutory funding partners, the local authority, police, national probation service, and health, must be represented on the board. 
c) members of the YOS management board should be empowered with the capacity to make strategic decisions. 
d) the Board should determine how appropriate youth justice services are provided and funded. 
e) the Board should oversee the formulation of a draft youth justice plan. 
 
1.2 The guidance also suggests that in discharging functions relating to youth offending the Board may benefit from considering broader membership. The guidance suggests additional optional partners which could be on an ad hoc basis when required as follows; a) youth courts  
b) court legal advisors 
c) community safety managers  
d) housing providers 
e) voluntary sector representatives 
f) local secure establishment 
g) elected members 
      2. Purpose of the board 
  
2.1 To provide an inter-agency management forum to oversee and monitor the work of the Leicester Youth Offending Service to meet the statutory principal aim preventing offending and reoffending by children and young people.     3. The objectives and responsibilities of the Board  3.1 The objectives of the board are as follows: 
a) to take overall management responsibility for the establishment and development of the Leicester  Youth Offending Service. 
b) to provide the formal reporting line and receive regular reports on the progress and work of the Service 
c) to take all delegated management decisions not within the authority of the Head of Service for  Early Help: Children Centres, Youth and Family Support.  
d) to provide the necessary budget overview, including the review of agency contributions. 
e) to provide a forum for resolution of inter-agency issues. 
f) to receive and approve the draft Youth Justice Plan prior to final approval by elected members and  members of the partnership authorities.  
g) to monitor and review the progress made in achieving the objectives and performance targets set out in the annual Youth Justice Plan 
h) through the Head of Service for Early Help and Service Manager for YOS, ensure that the service is prepared for inspection by the HMIP (HM Inspectorate of Probation) and that all requests for  information by the Board are met promptly. 
i) to ensure that the work of the YOS makes the necessary links with the Leicester, Leicestershire and 
Rutland Criminal Justice Board, as well as the key strategic links required by the Crime and Disorder  Act 1998, particularly those in relation to the wider crime and disorder reduction strategies and specific youth crime reduction strategies. 
 4. The Method of Operation 
 4.1 The board will meet on a quarterly basis, holding four meetings a year. The agenda will consist of the following regular items:  
 
a) Performance (quantitative and qualitative) and Finance 
b) Partnership updates 
c) Exception reporting for Critical Learning Reviews. 
 
4.2 One week prior to each Management Board , the relevant  documents will be circulated to all members. The reporting schedules are attached as appendix A. As appropriate, reports will progress through other relevant governance arrangements.  
 
4.3 Meetings are scheduled to last up to 2 hours with minutes taken. Minutes will be circulated to members within 10 working days of the meeting. Administration support will be provided by Head of Service. 
 
4.4 Management Board members are responsible for attending the meeting or sending a nominated representative on their behalf.   
 
4.5 Management Board members are responsible for ensuring key information is shared with their agencies.  
  




 	1 

 	1 



 	1 





 	15 

 	15 



 	15 

 
Appendix 	 

 
Appendix 	 

 	15 

 	15 

 
Appendix 	 

 	15 





 	15 

 	15 



 	15 

