

Vision and Values















Strategic Management Board - Governance
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 lays out the minimum statutory requirements for Youth Offending Teams in England and Wales.
The Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Management Board provides the governance arrangements for the service upon which the respective partners agree to abide. 
The YOS Management Board is responsible for ensuring that the principle aim of preventing offending by children and young people in Lincolnshire is promoted and that the work of the Youth Offending Service is focused on achieving local targets and those set nationally by the Youth Justice Board. The Board will ensure that the YOS works to recognised standards and that all work is underpinned by the desire to achieving the very best outcomes for children and young people who come to the attention of the youth justice system in Lincolnshire.
The YOS Management Board carries a key strategic role and the representatives from partner agencies should be strategic decision makers to ensure that board business is progressed and contribute to the development of the annual Youth Justice Plan. The Board will provide the overall strategic direction for Youth Justice Services in Lincolnshire, and monitor objectives linked to key performance indicators, within the national framework established by the Youth Justice Board and other locally agreed priorities. The primary functions of the Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Management Board are as follows:
o Oversee and monitor how appropriate youth justice services are to be provided and funded within Lincolnshire. 
o To drive service improvement and consider recommendations of all external audits and HMIP inspections and support service improvement plans. 
o Ensuring that the role, responsibilities and business objectives of Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service are understood and included, where appropriate, in any service planning and developments within their own agency.
o Ensure the YOS works within its designated allocated budget and that the financial position of the YOS is reviewed and key risks linked to funding and resources are addressed.
o Receive and monitor performance information which provides assurance against key indicators including National Standards and those expected by the Youth Justice Board.
o Examine and question performance data supplied by the YOS Manager, consider emerging trends and provide a strategic response.
o Using YOS performance data to establish any areas of underperformance and to address these using a problem solving approach.
o Monitoring of CSPPI and recommendations of Critical Learning Reviews and further Local Management Reports (where appropriate).














Partnerships 














						







                                           


                                





                                                                












Appendices: 
Youth Offending Service Budget - 2019/20


The table below illustrates the funding sources and income which supports the activities of the service. It is essential that the funding is directed towards key priorities and core objectives. 


2018/192019/20YJB Grant Funding

£729,156£722,290Lincolnshire County Council Funding

£634,458£651,733Police Funding:
cash plus in kind contribution
£172,900 from the Police and Crime Commissioner plus
2 Seconded Police Officers£172,900 from the Police and Crime Commissioner plus
2 Seconded Police OfficersProbation funding:
cash plus in kind contribution
1.4 FTE Probation Officer1.4 FTE Probation OfficerCCG/Health Funding:
cash plus in kind contribution


2 dedicated CAMHS Practitioners in-kind2 dedicated CAMHS Practitioners in-kindTotal£1,536.514.00£1,546.923.00



Breakdown of Expenditure - Lincolnshire Youth Justice Grant 2018/19







Structure Charts




























Signatures

Andy Cook - Service Manager (Future4Me)




Pete Adey - (Chair) Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Strategic Management Board


   				   



