














YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN

2016 - 2019

UPDATE 2019

LIVERPOOL YOUTH OFFENDING SERVICE
YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN UPDATE 2018



INTRODUCTION

This is the 2019 update of the three-year plan for youth justice in Liverpool (2016 - 2019). Within in there are updates on current activities and additional ones added where appropriate. In addition, there is refreshed details of key information, including finance and governance. 

Review of 2018 - 19 and risks to future delivery against the youth justice outcome measures

FTE
In 2018-19 Liverpool have seen an improvement of 150 first time entrants (FTEs) to the Youth Justice System. This figure is 4% lower than the numbers of FTEs in 2017-18. The Graph below shows that the quarterly counts of FTES are following a decreasing trendline, overall.

















The offences show that 81% of the FTE offences this year had a seriousness score of between 1 and 3. The most common outcome was a First-Tier Penalty (71%).

The pie chart below shows that more than two-fifths of FTE offences in 2018-19 were violence against the person (44%, 66 offences). Further analysis of the FTE violence offences show that the following offence types accounted for three-quarters of the violence offences:
* Possession of a knife/ blade/ sharp pointed article in a public place (32%, 21 offences).
* Possession of an offensive weapon in a public place (20%, 13 offences).
* Assault by beating (17%, 11 offences).

 





















Prevention 

There continues to be an emphasis within the service on early help with the prevention team having. In 2018-19, there were 96 referrals to the Prevention Team, of which 96 were invited to work with Prevention. Of these, 68 engaged (71%). 61 cases are either ongoing or have successfully or partially completed the intervention. At the time of writing, none of the successful or ongoing cases this year have become FTES. 



















This team continues to work closely with targeted youth support and other teams within the Youth Offending Service, they have taken over the case holding of OOCD.








Triage

The graph shows counts of young people who successfully completed a Community Resolution (CR), and the numbers of young people who have subsequently become First Time Entrants in Liverpool since April 2017. 

The number of successful CR completions between 2017-18 and 2018-19 is similar, with 10 fewer successful completions so far this year (220 v 210). As time goes on, the number of successful completions is likely to increase, particularly for the latest quarters.

Of the 220 young people who successfully completed CR in 2017-18, 21(10%) have gone on become an FTE for offences which were committed within a year of their CR intervention. For 2018-19 so far, the figure is 3% (6 young people).
.























Re offending 


The Ministry of Justice provides proven re-offending statistics for a three month cohort. The 3 month cohort is tracked over 12 months.

The most recent quarterly data, for Apr 2017- Jun 2017 shows that the binary re-offending rate in Liverpool is higher than the England rate (47.9% compared with 38.4%), and has increased compared with the same period in the previous year (44.2% in Apr 2016 - Jun 2016).  In terms of numbers of young people - for the most recent re-offending cohort - it means that of the 73 cases who were in in the Liverpool YOS cohort for Apr 2017 - Jun 2017, 35 re-offended within 12 months.






The Graph to the side shows trends in average numbers of re-offences per re-offender between Apr 2016 - Jun 2016 and Apr 2017 - Jun 2017. 

Despite having seen an increase compared to the previous year, Liverpool's re-offending cohort for this period continues to have a lower number of average re-offences per re-offender (3.49 re-offences per reoffender) than the North West and England & Wales averages over the same period. The 35 young people from the Apr17 - Jun17 cohort who re-offended during this period committed 122 re-offences between them. 










Offences 

Comparing data for April 2017 to March 2018 with data for April 2018 to March 2019, we can see that overall counts of offences for sentencing have decreased by 11% (equating to 83 fewer offences).

Drug Offences 

There has been a 21% increase in the numbers of drug offences for sentencing this year, compared with last year (+32 offences). Drug offences have accounted for a greater proportion of all offences this year (29%) compared with last year (21%).

The table below shows the types of drug offences which youths have been sentenced for in 2018-19.  'Possession of Controlled Drugs - Class B' offences account for the highest percentage (64%). 

 Apr-Mar 2019% of total drug offencesPossession - Class B drug11864Supply - Class A drug3318Supply - Class B drug1910Possession - Class A drug126Obstruct an authorised person in exercise of a section 23 power to detain / search a person / vehicle / vessel re drugs 21Produce a class B drug - other 11Grand Total185100.0







Violent Offences

Counts of violent offences have fallen by 23% when 2018-19 is compared with 2017-18 (50 fewer offences). Violent offences account for a lower proportion of offences this year, than they did last year (26% compared with 30%). The majority of violence offences in 2018-19 have had a seriousness score of 3 (95%).

* Possession of a knife/ blade/ sharp pointed article in a public place accounted for 27% of total violence offences  (47 offences) in 2018-19. There were a similar number of these offences in 2017-18 (48 offences), but they accounted for a smaller percentage of the total violence offences that year (22%).
* Assault by beating acccounted for 23% of total violence offences (39 offences). In 2017-18,  we saw a greater number of these offences (68 offences), and these accounted for a greater percentage of violence offfences that year (31%).
* Possession of an offensive weapon in a public place  accounted for 17% of total violence offences (29 offences) in 2018-19. In 2017-18, we saw slightly fewer of these offences (26), accounting for 12% of all violence offences. 

Tracking and analysis of BME and LAC young people continues, as well as looking at targeting of resources.The proportion of young offenders of White ethnic background in Liverpool in 2018-19 was 80%; which is lower than expected when compared with the 2011 Census figure for Liverpool (87% of Liverpool's 10-17yrs population are from a White ethnic background).

Young people of BAME backgrounds continue to be over-represented in Liverpool's offending cohort compared to the 2011 Census (20% BAME offenders in Liverpool, whilst 13% of Liverpool's 10-17yrs population are from a BAME background). However, Liverpool has a smaller percentage of offenders from BAME backgrounds compared to that seen nationally (33%).


LAC
In April 2019, there were 754 Looked After Children (LAC) aged 10 and over in Liverpool. Between April and March 2019, there were 30 young people who received at least one substantive outcome for offence(s) committed whilst they were in care (there were 31 in 2017-18). Ten of these 30 young people were First Time Entrants in this period.
*     80% of LAC offenders so far this year were male.
*     90% were older teens, aged 15-17 years.
*     20% of the LAC cohort of offenders were of BAME background.
*     55% of the outcomes given to LAC offenders were Community Penalties (e.g. Rehabilitation Orders). 				
*    88% of LAC offences were gravity 3 or below.

The majority of LAC offences this year were offences of Violence against the person (32%), followed by Drugs (25%) and criminal Damage (10%)																			


An additional 12 LAC received a substantive outcome this year for offences which they committed before they were placed into care. See Pie chart below.	
Custody 

There have been 27 young offenders who have received at least one custodial sentence so far in 2018-19, which is an increase compared to last year, when the figure was 22. However, over the long term, Liverpool is still seeing an overall declining trend for custodial outcomes see chart below. 














The majority of custodial offences in 2018-19 were offences of Violence against the Person the pie chart to the side shows that the majority of custodial offences for sentencing in Liverpool in 2018-19 were either violence (21%) or drug offences (20%).






Key findings of Liverpool YOS 2018-19

Offences, Offenders and Outcomes: 

* We have seen fewer offences, offenders and outcomes compared to last year.

* Prevention: Accepted referrals to Prevention have fallen by one-fifth compared with 2017-18.

* Triage: Similar numbers of Community Resolutions have been successfully completed compared to last year.

* First Time Entrants: Numbers of First Time Entrants in 2018-19 are similar to the previous year.

* Custody: There have been 27 young people sentenced to custody between April and March 2019; an increase of 5 compared to 2017-18. 

* Re-offending: Quarterly binary re-offending rates for the Apr 17 to Jun 17 cohort in Liverpool are higher than the national rate and have increased compared with the same period in the previous year.The average number of re-offences per re-offender in Liverpool has increased compared with the same period in the previous year, but remains lower than the national rate.

* Looked After Children:Compared with figures for the previous year, numbers of LAC offending have remained stable (31 in 2017-18 and 30 in 2018-19).

Inspection 2019 

As a result of HMIP inspection findings, they have made eight recommendations that we believe, if implemented, will have a positive impact on the quality of youth offending services in Liverpool. This will improve the lives of the children in contact with youth offending services, and better protect the public. The operational plan to address these recommendations are outlined towards the end of plan.

The Liverpool Youth Offending Service should:
1. update its out-of-court processes to make sure that all children and young people, including those receiving community resolutions, are properlyassessed and a proportionate intervention plan is in place for each case
2. improve communication between the YOS Management Board and operational staff to increase awareness and understanding of each other's role and work
3. ensure that the board furthers develops its understanding of the service being delivered by the YOS to children and young people
4. ensure operational staff understand the implications of the YOS moving from the city council's community services directorate to children's services
5. monitor the number of children and young people not in education, training or employment and implement strategies to minimise this number
6. review intervention planning processes to make sure that plans are understood by children and young people
7. capture the views of children and young people, their parents or carers and other stakeholders so that they can influence future service delivery.

Merseyside Police and Liverpool Youth Offending Service should:
       8. consider fully co-locating the seconded police officers within the YOS.
 

















Structure and governance 

Liverpool YOS reports to the Youth Justice Management Board, which is made up of senior representatives from partner agencies - Health, Court Services, Children's Services, Community Services, Probation, Police, and the chair of the Youth Court Magistrates.  The Board meets regularly, reviews performance information, and takes an active role in strategic developments. The Youth Justice Management Board was chaired by a police Chief Superintendent however the chair has been seconded to head up the VRU and the Director of childrens Services has taken on the cahiring on the board . The YOS is part of Targeted Services for Young People and this has recenlty been moved to sit uner childrens Services within Liverpool City Council. The Head of Service is managed by the Divisional Manager for Targeted Services for Young People and Communities, this includes community safety. The YOS reports to the Youth Justice Management Board on requirements of the YJB which includes submission of data, placement information, National Standards audits, any reviews of safeguarding and/or public protection incidents and HMIP full and thematic inspections. These are part of a fixed agenda. In addition, the Head of Service reports on any barriers to multi-agency working and these are addressed via the Board and the Chair which this year included making representations to the National Probation Service about the allocation of Probation staff to the Service. The Head of Service is the designated safeguarding officer for the YOS and chairs LIT plus and a multi-agency meetings to discuss young people who are involved in anti-social behaviour within the local community and/or possible criminal exploitation. The Head of Service sits on the LSCP Critical Incident Group, the strategic MACE and the Audit Group. There are close links and joint working between the YOS Head of Service and Service Managers in Children's Social Care. The Divisional Manager sits on the Families Strategic Board, Neglect Steering Group, Disarm Serious and Organised Crime meeting and the LSCP information meeting. 

2019 update: 

The service has gone through some significant strategical changes during the year whilst also being subject to a full joint inspection in March 2019. The YOS management board held an away afternoon in December 2018 and decided to change its name to a Youth Justice Management board to reflect its full responsibilities and ensure it was seen as the leading governance board for matters around Youth Justice. In October 2018 it was decided to move TSYP from community services to the Children's Services directorate to realign all of services to children and young people across the City Council. The Move was delayed due to a number of inspections including our own and the move to Children's Services finally took place in June 2019. Recently the chair of the Youth Justice Board changed as the superintendent was seconded to the VRU enabling the chair to be taken over by the director of Children's Services.  During 2019 the Youth offending side of the service prioritised embedding some of the structural changes made in 2018. The AC OIC who was employed by the Local CRC retired from post resulting in this being taken back in house and YOS staff taking on the role and cordination and delivery of the local AC.

Resources and value for money
Liverpool Youth Offending Service Funding Streams 2019/20
AgencyStaffing CostsPayments in kindOther delegated fundsTotalPolice97,680 97,680Police and Crime Commissioner174,000174,000Probation73,260 73,260Health80,000 80,000Local Authority1,413,965 443,0591,857,024Welsh Government   0YJB1,025,992 01,025,992Other219,684  219,684Total3,084,5810443,0593,527,640
The YJB good practice grant has been budgeted as follows: £1,025,992

Service Objective OneEmerging and Continuing Concerns38%  £389,876.96Service Objective TwoFirst Time Entrants30% £307,797.60Service Objective ThreeCustody20%  £205,198.40Effective Safeguarding 6%     £61,559.52Effective Public Protection6%     £61,559.52




Junior Attendance Centre
The JAC runs fortnightly with workers from the Youth offending Service due the the OIC reriring from CRC during late 2018. The AC was moved to a Youth Centre and we are currnley reviewing the programmes that are run for the young people. The changes in the the AC has enabbled us to bring the operation of the AC much closer to the needs of the service.
 
Asset Plus
Asset Plus is now embedded within the service. The Quality assurance process has changed to twice yearly however a QAMP has been drawn up to ensure all our performance and management oversight is mapped and linked up operationally and strategically. 




	

	


















Type of ContractStrategic Manager (PT)Strategic Manager (FT) Operational Manager (PT)Operational Manager (FT)Practitioners (PT)Practitioners (FT)Administration (PT)Administration (FT)SessionalStudents/ traineesVolunteerTotalPermanent 1 4 47 9  061Fixed-term     1    01Outsourced          00Temporary         101Vacant          00Seconded Children's Services          00Seconded Probation    0.51    01.5Seconded Police     2    02Seconded Health (Substance misuse)     3    03Seconded Health (Mental health)          00Seconded Health (Physical health)     2    02Seconded Health (Speech/language)          00Other/Unspecified Seconded Health     1    01Seconded Education          00Seconded Connexions     1    01Seconded Other          00Total01040.5580901073.5Disabled (self-classified)000007010008
Staffing of YOT by contract type
The staffing in Liverpool YOS is compliant with the minimum staffing requirements set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 (which requires that the YOT has a nominated person from each of the following statutory partners: police service, children's services, national probation service, education and health.

	
EthnicityManagers StrategicManagers OperationalPractitionersAdministrativeSessionalStudentVolunteerTotalMFMFMFMFMFMFMFMFWhite British1311831610393176White Irish1111Other WhiteWhite & Black CaribbeanWhite & Black AfricanWhite & AsianOther Mixed22IndianPakistaniBangladeshiOther Asian44CaribbeanAfrican11Other Black3131ChineseAny other ethnic group134Not knownTotal0131223507000011463690



Partnership arrangements

The YOS works in partnership with Merseyside Police, Children's Services, the National Probation Service, CAMHS, education providers including schools, Addaction, local charities and the Families Programme (Troubled Families). The Head of Service sits on LSCBP sub groups, chairs the DYO meeting for the IOM strategy, a YOS representative sits on the FAP to discuss education placements, the LIT to discuss anti-social behaviour, and the Head of Service chairs the LIT Plus in regard to more problematic anti-social behaviour, gang members and possible criminal exploitation. In additions she works in collaboration with the community safety partnership to respond to identified hotspot areas. The Divisional Manager represents the YOS on the LSCBP, Citysafe Board and the Children's Commissioning Board. The YOS has a dedicated clinical psychologist provision commissioned by the Clinical Commissioning Group and a Mental Health Liaison and Diversion Service which is externally funded and provided by Merseycare. The YOS also has close links with the Families Programme (Troubled Families) in Liverpool. All young people who are within the cohort are identified on Childview and the Families Programme funds a team manager post within Targeted Services for Young People for a team that works with victims of child exploitation. The Head of Service sits on the strategic MACE (multi-agency child exploitation meeting) as well as on the Liverpool City Region Child Exploitation meeting and the Liverpool City Region Serious and Organised Crime Group. The Reducing Custody Team provide resettlement plans for young people who are being released from custody: all eligible young people are referred to the Everton In the Community Safe Hands Programme and are also offered a mentor to assist them in completing their licence. There is a Senior Practitioner within the YOS, as well as two Education Social Workers who have responsibility for ETE and ensuring that those young people are offered suitable training placements via the Career Connect worker who is situated four days a week within the YOS. The YOS also has a worker based at Wetherby YOI for a day, once a week. The YOS Head of Service sits on the Prevent Steering Group and the YOS is fully involved in any panels that may be held for relevant children/young people. Currently there have been no young people accused or convicted of extremism related offences but the links are already embedded for a response if they were. All staff have been trained in identifying extremism and how to make referrals. 









1. Emerging and continuing concerns 

The completed have been removed 
ACTIVITYINTENDED OUTCOMESWORK ELEMENTSACCOUNTABILITYTARGETPROGRESS TO DATEIndicative YJB Budget 
Analysis of re-offending 

Reduce re-offending in young people who do not receive a statutory intervention

















Ensure young people are receiving the most appropriate level of intervention


Use of tracker and analysis of re-offending population



Annual review of data to understand the latest position and any trends emerging


Analysis of young people on statutory orders to ensure that intervention is at correct level

Three monthly review of intensive statutory orders to take into account likelihood of re-offending 

Head of Service/ Analyst





Team Manager QAP






Team Manager QAP






Team Manager and Reviewing Officer from Quality PerformanceTeam 








Completed  Ongoing to try and use the YJB live tracking tool for current offending data 

Ongoing - task to be completed by quality assurance and performance Team.


Ongoing - task to be completed by quality assurance and performance Team

Ongoing - task to be completed by quality assurance and performance Team
38 % 
Respond to over representation of BME (disproportionality) and LAC in re-offending cohort

Reduction in the over representation of black young people within the youth justice system 























Improve the outcomes for LAC young people entering and within the youth justice system
To investigate why in 2014/15 black young people became over-represented in the local youth justice system.



Examine arrest data to look if over representation of black young people evident at that point

Review offending behaviour programmes (individual and group work) to ensure that they take account and respond to diversity needs




Ensure LAC are identified on systems and this is taken into account in assessment and planning 


Head of Service/ Team Manager QAP








Head of Service/ Team Manager QAP





Team Manager RCT interventions/ Senior Practitioner Programmes









Team Manager Interventions









January 2019









January 2019






December 2018













Completed 













Ongoing - tracking has taken place, reports done to the management Board but standing agenda item


Ongoing 






Ongoing















Ongoing 











 
Review victim participation

Increase victim contact and support
Discussion with panel member volunteers to gauge interest in working with victims



Assess need for training and provide

Implement process for volunteers to work with victims and appropriate supervision/line management 

Team Manager Interventions







Senior Practitioner Victims


Senior Practitioner Volunteers/ Senior Practitioner Victims
September 2017
(from Nov 2016)





December 2017
(from Jan 2017)

Completed 
Completed - the service now have a pool of newly trained panel members and vounteers who act as mentors for case managers to refer young people into.
QA and performance management framework

Implement new QA process in line with Childview and Asset Plus

Review to ensure framework is identifying all areas of need/good practice


OMT with Head of Service 
 Completed 
This happens in OMT and QA meetings as standing agenda itemAdditional activity 
(from review 2017)

Implementation of joint Merseyside Youth Court Team







Centralised court team to service the courts with representation from all Merseyside YOTs

Agree Merseyside YOT protocols and working documents, get agreement and implement across Liverpool YOS


Head of ServiceCompleted March 2018
Completed but will be reviewed every year

Analysis of young people who commit offences out of area

Gain better picture of young people likely to become involved in county lines or be criminally exploited, this can then be fed into targeting of prevention and youth services

Snapshot of young people who have offended elsewhere over six month period and deeper analysis of characteristics

Engagement with young people as to what would have made a difference

Identify points at which young people could be referred into prevention and youth services

Agree process for targeted resource and most relevant young people

Implement process

Head of Service
Analyst
OMT




Senior Practitioner (programmes)



Team Manager (Prevention)






Team Manager (Prevention)



Team Manager (Prevention)



December 2017







April 2018




June 2018









August 2018




October 2018Ongoing as county lines and young people offending OOA is a significant number of young people in Liverpool.

Not completed carry over action for 2018.


Ongoing quality assurance work that will be carried out by the QAP team. Review full Inspections reports by HMIP


Completed 




Completed Additional Activity from 2018 reviewReduce re offending To strengthen the YOS workers ability to reflect and plan complex cases where the likelihood of further offending is highYOS to develop the effective practice in Case Planning Forums to incorporate the principles of case formulation when dealing with young people who pose a high likelihood of reoffendingAll Team managers April 2019Reduce offending by serious organised crime groups.Address and disrupt the patterns of reoffending through a proactive approach to intelligence sharing thereby reducing reoffendingQuality assurance and performance team manager to attend the police threat harm and risk meeting acting as the conduit between all the YOS teams and the police for known young people in OCG's. 
Head of Service and 

July 2018 Completed Comprenshive data was provided to the Childrens Commisioner. However this will remain ongoing due to demand Voice of the childYoung people's feedback is used to drive service development and improvement


The voice of the young person is clearly heard and helps shape the assessment, planning and interventionAn aggregate report on feedback from young people and their parents is taken to the YOS Management Board

Support the team to make full use of the self-assessment tools combined with three monthly reviews carried out by the Quality assurance team using a questionnaire.

Ensure practice going forward is inline with good practice Found in YOT full Case inspections.Head of Service and Team manager for Targeted Services





All team managers and QAP 











Head of Service and QAP Team Manager August 2018







September 2018















July 2018  Completed but ongoing priority






Completed but will remain due to Inspection findings and being an ongoing priority









Completed and Action plan drawn up 
2	First Time Entrants 

ACTIVITYINTENDED OUTCOMESWORK ELEMENTSACCOUNTABILITYTARGET DATEPROGRESS TO DATEIndicative YJB budget 
Review anti-social behaviour process 

Ensure that all young people identified as causing anti-social behaviour have the offer of intervention from the YOS


Attend LIT and other multi-agency meetings that discuss anti-social behaviour

Review young people who are referred to YOS for OOCD or on statutory order who have not been captured by prevention team and identify reasons why

Use of escalation processes if necessary to ensure multi-agency working for early identification and intervention
 

Team Manager Prevention



Team Manager Prevention/ Team Manager Interventions






Team Manager Prevention/ Head of Service

October 2016 onwards




February 2018
(from Sept 2017)







October 2016 onwards



Completed, ongoing 





Completed however this is still an issue and will be a new priority in 2019/20 due to 
Inspection findings * see improvement plan



Ongoing (team manager involved in early help via LIT and through early help hubs)30%  
Additional activity 
(from review 2017)

Review of LIT and LIT Plus (YOS participation and impact)


Streamline meetings to ensure consistency and that identified children/young people are in correct meeting




Review names of children and young people to ensure that the cohort has agreed, identified characteristics ie anti-social behaviour 

Review referral routes and pathways between LIT and LIT Plus to ensure they are the most effective

Review of outcomes to ensure that impact of being discussed in meetings can be measured

Head of Service
Analyst






Head of Service
Children's Services representatives



Head of Service
Analyst
October 2017







October 2017





October 2017Completed TOR drawn up and agreed by all








Completed  as above




Completed returns go to the citysafe board QIdentified Activity from 2018 reviewEncouraging diversionEnhance the use of Community Resolutions and OOCD as a prevention tool dealing with low level offendingWork in conjunction with the CJB to encourage defence solicitors to see the benefits of the OOCD process.Head of Service and Team Manager Prevention September 2018Completed *see improvement plan


3	Custody 

ACTIVITYINTENDED OUTCOMESWORK ELEMENTSACCOUNTABILITYTARGETPROGRESS TO DATEIndicative YJB budget
Criminal exploitation

Reduce the number of young people being exploited


Analysis of young people being exploited to identify points of intervention


 


Head of Service/ Analyst

April 2017
(from Sept 2017 onwards)




Completed  ongoing due to slight increase in custody figures 20%  
Review remand and custody decisions

Ensure all custodial outcomes are appropriate and proportionate

Include feedback from court decisions in QA processes

Examine use of escalation processes and formalise if necessary

Feedback on analysis of results i.e. appropriateness, escalation etc. to OMT



Merseyside Court Partnership


September 2017 (from Dec 2016)


October 2016 onwards



September 2017
 completed, and ongoing to ensure quality service is delivered by merseyside court servcies 




Additional activity 
(from review 2017 amended 18/19

Develop programme around carrying weapons and involvement in USG/OCGs
Reduce the number of young people receiving custodial sentences for serious offences related to gun and knife crime

Research and write programme on weapons awareness to include the law, implications for communities, families and children/young people, links to USG and OCGs and wider exploitation concerns

Include use of serious case reviews and other LSCB/multi-agency reviews

Team Manager Interventions











Team Manager Interventions
January 2018











January 2018
Completed 











Completed part of away day.

Ongoing Recommendation To update the out-of-court processes to make sure that all children and young people in Liverpool are properly assessed and proportionate intervention plan is in place for each case No Action to be takenBy WhomBy when Rag Rating Progress to dateHow will we evidence it 1Review the Current OOCD process with Merseyside police to ensure the young people who only require intervention get it. Head of Service and Merseyside Police July 2019RedA meeting is scheduled for June 25th to agree a process and criteria for OOCDA joint OOCD policy will be drawn up and agreed via the police and the management board.2.Review internal process and resourcing of OOCDTask and Finish Group chaired by head of serviceJuly 2019Amber1st meeting took place 19/06/19. It has been agreed that the prevention team will have OOCD allocated to them rather than just one member of the team. 

A screening tool and home visit will be completed before the young person is referred to panel. The screening tool will make a recommendation to inform the panel of the best disposal and type of intervention. 

Once panel have agreed the Case manager will go out complete an assessment and a planning tool outlining the agreed intervention with the young person. 

The new process is currently being written up to be launched across the service.A new Liverpool OOCD process will be written and signed off by my service. 






The process will be put on every team meetings agenda to ensure clarity.3.Adapt an assessment tool that is currently being used in the prevention service on all young people that go through OOCD.
Task and Finish Group chaired by head of serviceJuly 2019Amber1st meeting took place on 19th June. It was agreed that the assessment tool for prevention would be used with some changes to ensure the assessment covered desistance, safety to self and safety to others



The assessment will be attached to child view, the service will develop a reporting tool to show how timely assessments were and what risks ratings young people are assessed at in OOCD. This will be reported to the Youth Justice Management Board. The quality of assessments will be included in the end to end case management audit rounds.
4.Move away from the planning pathway in Asset+ and develop a child friendly planning tool for the whole service from prevention to custody.Task and Finish Group chaired by Head of serviceAugust 2019Amber  Some examples have already been shared with staff, however we need to decide which is best suited for Liverpool.This is being uploaded to Child view and is included in our end to end case management audit of cases for quality.5.Look into providing admin support around the OOCDHead of ServiceJuly 2019RedCurrently reviewing budget and resources now we have moved to Children's servicesThe creation of an extra post6.Look at satellite offices to deliver OOCD assessments and interventions Team Manager and prevention teamSeptember 2019RedNone A list of venues to carry out structured workRecommendation 2 & 3Improve communication between the YOS Management Board and operational staff to increase awareness and understanding of each other's role and work

Ensure that the board furthers develops its understanding of the service being delivered by the YOS to children and young people.No Action takenBy whomBy whenRag RatingProgress to Date How will we evidence it1.A quarterly newsletter will be developed by the Management board for staff.Management BoardSeptember 2019RedThis will be put on the agenda for the next board in July.Records of the newsletter2.A Case study will be presented at every management boardTeam Managers and Case managersSeptember 2019RedThis will be put on the agenda for the next board in JulyManagement Board Minutes 3.A presentation will be delivered by a staff member at each board. The staff member will go round the service to ask all staff members if there are any other issues they want raising at the board and then feeding backHead of Service , Team managers and Front line OfficersJuly 2019RedThis will be put on the agenda for the next board in JulyManagement Board Minutes4.Champions will be appointed from the management board against the 5 YJB National Standards. The expectations of the champion is to visit this area of work with front line practitioners and observe front line practice.Management Board and YJB regional RepJuly/Sept 2019AmberThis was discussed in the board away day back in December 2018 however was put on hold due to inspection. Champions will be chosen at the next board in July 2019Management Board Minutes Management Board Minutes5All board members to do 1/2 day-develop understanding as part of an induction Management Board and StaffOngoing throughout the year to start in September 2019Red NoneStaff Feedback and Board Feedback6Board chair and director of childrens services to continue to attend YOS team away days to ensure the voice of the staff is included in developing and shaping the YOSHead of Service , Management Board Chair, Director of Children's ServicesOngoing at quarterly events through year started on 17th June


GreenOne event already attended on 17th June. Very positive feedback receivedStaff feedback and notes from future away daysRecommendation 4Ensure operational staff understand the implications of the YOS moving from the city council's community services directorate to children's services
No Action TakenBy whomBy When  Rag RatingProgress to dateHow will we Evidence 1.Staff away day with the Director of children's services and assistant director 17th June to discuss the move to children's services. The agenda will include 
1. Rationale for move and benefits from Director
2. Open question and Answer slot
3. Chair of management Board Vision and future
4. Inspection outcome and recommendations
5. Group work staff ideas on inspection improvement planHead of Service , Management Board Chair, Director of Children's ServicesJune 17th 2019GreenThe event took place, very positive feedback from all involved.Agenda, Notes from group work and staff feedback.2. The Director and Assistant Director will visit individual team meetings to meet staff and answer further questionsHead of service and team managersJuly 2019AmberDate are being provided to PA'sStaff feedback3.Open offer from Director to send emails when staff feel they have questionsDirector Children's Services June 2019GreenThis is an open offer and already the director has accepted an invitation to meet with a group of young people.Staff Feedback 4.Provide content to the children's services news letter from our service to be disseminated across the directorate.Whole service June 2019 then ongoingGreen The newsletter is due to go out in July. The service has provided an introductory segment to our service.Feedback from staff Recommendation 5Monitor the number of children and young people not in education, training or employment and implement strategies to minimise this number
No Action TakenBy whomBy when Rag RatingProgress to dateHow will we Evidence 1.Strategic Education officer to become a member of the youth justice management board Management BoardJuly 2019AmberSenior education officer has been invited to the next management board in July 2019Management board membership attendance sheet and connection with frontline issues2.Timely and accurate ETE data information to be provided to the Management board and the 6 weekly service performance meetingsHead of Service and quality assurance October 2019Amber Tracking for Liverpool council have produced a performance report.Via minutes, challenging where young people aren't making progress and dedicated provision being developed for the hard to reach.3Informal learning event to take place with the whole service to explore different forms of learning and how we can facilitate informal learning for our young people.Education officer and Head of service August 2019RednoneStaff feedback4.To review education officer provision in the service with a view to increasing the resource within current budget.Head of service SeptemberAmberThe Job description is currently being reviewed along with the budget resource.When the post is in place and staff feedback5.Identify a staff member to sit on the APT evaluation and quality assurance group.APT manager and head of service July 2019Red noneFeedback from the staff member 6.Investigate the possibility of gaining accreditation for some of the group work programmes.Head of service November 2019Red noneThe service being able to provide informal learning opportunities for young people.Recommendation 6Review intervention planning processes to make sure that plans are understood by children and young people
NoAction TakenBy whomBy whenRag Rating Progress to DateHow will we Evidence 1. By changing the intervention planning tool to a child/young person friendly this will ensure that the language the young person is reflected and used to measure progress and outcomes (this will cover a number of recommendations in 1,6 and 7)Head of service with a task and finish group August 2019Amber  Some examples have already been shared with staff, however we need to decide which is best suited for Liverpool.This is being uploaded to Child view and is included in our end to end case management audit of cases for quality.2Child Friendly Planning Tool-JOURNAL
Task and finish groupOctober 2019RedNone although we have examples of journalsChild View recording Recommendations7Capture the views of children and young people, their parents or carers and other stakeholders so that they can influence future service deliveryNo Action TakenBy whomBy when Rag RatingProgress to DateHow will we Evidence 1.By changing the intervention planning tool to a child/young person friendly this will ensure that the language the young person is reflected and used to measure progress and outcomes (this will cover a number of recommendations in 1,6 and 7)Head of service with a task and finish group August 2019Amber  Some examples have already been shared with staff, however we need to decide which is best suited for Liverpool.This is being uploaded to Child view and is included in our end to end case management audit of cases for quality.management audit of cases for quality.2.To identify a dedicated reviewing officer post to work across the whole service to gain the voice of the child on all order reviews and exit from the service.Head of service September 2019RednoneEvidence from a reviewing officer in child view clearly recording the Childs views.3.Change the recording by officers clearly recording VOC in child view, however also seeing if a drop down for VOC can be added to child view.Whole service July 2019Amber This has been discussed in Team meetings and will be agenda on all team meetings for discussionVOC the child will be clear in case recording. This will be clear in the end to end case management audit tool and performance reports.4.Increase celebration events around achievements that young people make in the service especially Skill MillWhole service  Ongoing to start in JuneamberA slot took place on the away day to invite two young people who completed Skill Mill. They were provided certificates presented by the Director and senior manager from united utilities The number of events that have taken place and feedback from children and young people.Recommendation 8Merseyside Police and Liverpool Youth Offending Service should: Consider fully co-locating the seconded police officers within the YOS.
NoAction TakenBy whomBy When Rag Rating Progress to DateHow will we Evidence 1.The Recommendation to be discussed at the soonest youth Justice Management Board July 3rd 2019Head of Service & Management Board July 2019Red NoneManagement Board Minutes 2. Head of Service to meet with Strategic Police to review Police officers role and arrangements to the YOT.Head of service and Merseyside Police.August 2019RedNonePresence of the officers in the office.


Approved by Director Of Childrens Services Liverpool City Council , Chair of Liverpool YJ management Board

Signature:- 





Steve Reddy Director of Childrens Services Liverpool City Council  19/08.19










