                                                                                               
	

Medway Youth Justice Partnership

 DELIVERY PLAN
2019/20

A partnership commitment to reducing 
youth crime and creating safer communities
in Medway

Strood Youth Centre, Montfort Road Rochester, Kent, ME2 3ET


Foreword by:
1. Neil Davies (Chief Executive Officer- Medway Council) and
2. Andrew Willetts (Head Of Service)

As the Chair of Medway Youth Justice Partnership Board and Head Of Service for Early Help and Targeted Services, we are delighted to introduce our final year delivery plan (against the strategy in place for 2017-2020), which reflects our successes as a partnership and sets out how we will continue to deliver high quality, high performing youth justice services. 

The strategy and initial delivery plan has been achieved and we feel we are currently 12 months ahead of our plan to be outstanding by 2021. At the heart of our success is the commitment and skill of practitioners, drawn together from an array of different disciplines and professional backgrounds, all of whom are intent upon making a difference to their community through their work. 

The past 2 years have seen a tremendous appetite from our partners to deliver improved services and outcomes for children. Because of this, we feel a new delivery plan for this year (2019) is needed, to ensure we are focused on getting to outstanding both in a HMIP judgement but also in how young people and partners see us in our delivery of youth justice services. Our focus this year will be on:

1. Data analysis
2. Health outcomes
3. Serious Youth Violence
4. Work force training
5. Implement new national standards
6. Inspection ready

We have a new arrangement with business and intelligence to better understand our data and through analysis, identify trends to inform future delivery. We are also working with public health in relation to a youth justice chapter for the joint strategic needs assessment. This will be completed this autumn ready for a new strategy for 2020 to 2023. We wholeheartedly believe that a longer-term plan is essential to provide the foresight and resilience required to enable us to sustain our strong performance and further reform key areas of the youth justice system locally and regionally.  

At the heart of our strategy and plan is an unswerving commitment to:

1. Deliver an effective youth justice system as a partnership, 
2. Optimise relevant skill, knowledge and resources through joint action, rather than developing a plan that centres largely upon the activities of a single youth offending team.

We continue to strive to use resources in the most effective way by preventing the costs of crime through early targeted intervention and promoting restorative justice processes to help a young person make amends for their behaviour. 


.............................................						................................................

Neil Davies (Chairman and CEO)					Andrew Willetts
Medway Youth Justice Partnership Board			Head Of Service
Strategic Priorities 2017-2020




Prevent
Youth Crime  youth
crime
Reduce
Re-offending
(including binary offending) e reoffending

Safeguard young people
from harm
Safeguarding
Protect the
public from
harm the
Public


Quality Assurance
Workforce Development
Partnership Activity
Governance

Additional to our overall strategic priorities, we will have a focus on: 
1. YP offending profile in Medway with a focus on:
- Disproportionality (BME) 
- Themes on vulnerable groups (MISSING, Child Sexual Exploitation and Gangs) looking at Safeguarding, Desistance and Risk.
- Understanding data to improve outcomes
2. Young people receiving an OOCD
3. Links and resources around placements and transforming care (Mental Health, LD/ Autism and Challenging Behaviour).
4. Young people voice

Resourcing & Value for Money
The Youth Offending responsibilities are funded through contributions from the statutory partner agencies in accordance with the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. The table below shows the amount of funding from each of the partner agencies for the year 2019-20. These contributions are reviewed each year. In addition, the YOT receives a Youth Justice Grant from the Ministry of Justice and Department for Education which is passported through the Youth Justice Partnership Board and a grant from the Kent and Medway Police and Crime Commissioner in respect of which there is an annual bidding process.


Delegated Funds from Partner Agencies
OPCC 							£90,353
Probation 						£2,500 
NHS England (Trauma Informed Practice) 	          £56,000 
Local Authority 					£158,370 
YJB 							£302,231 
       Total 			£609,454



Youth Justice Partnership Board governance and membership
The previous YOT management board developed into a Youth Justice Partnership Board (YJPB) in June 2017. The YJPB retains a clear focus on the principal aim of reducing offending and re-offending and maintains strategic oversight of the delivery and performance of the local youth justice system. The membership of the board provides senior representation from key partners to ensure that young people involved in the youth justice system have access to universal and specialist services delivered by partners and other key agencies. The chair is the Chief Executive of the Local Authority and the key links are through the Medway Safeguarding Partnership Board and the Community Safety Executive Group. Medway also links with the Kent Criminal Justice Board and other relevant joint forms.

Key achievements:
Over the past 12 months 2018/19, we have seen a growing and maturing relationship with our partners in ensuring the delivery of joint working exists to support young peoples under the youth offending team. 
Example:
- More young people accessing education, training or employment (IAG)
- Ability to better manage risk (Police)
- Transfer of young people into adult service (probation)
- Developing easy and natural access into emotional health and wellbeing pathways and substance misuse services (NELFT/ Open road)
- Young people better access health, SaLT and other routes (Educational psychology and MCH)
The delivery of our desistance model has gone from strength to strength and has been identified at a national level for working well and impacting on our delivery of 'child centred' work.  Medway Youth Offending Team has also spoken at the national conference to share our practice. This has been reviewed and we have been involved with a project with Professor Stephen Case from the University of Loughborough, to develop a child first approach to practice, to further develop and learn on our model.
Medway has also been successful with funding on the development and training in trauma informed practice. This has been positive for staff within the youth offending team and with the additional funding we will be training over 600 partners in this model and creating a phycologist within the service to support meet young people's needs.
Updates on the previous priorities. 
1. FTE:
The Youth Offending Team has sought to develop its practice in relation to first time entrants / out of court disposals (OOCD's). We have focused some work and given attention this year to OOCD. All OOCD's are offered assessment, planning and interventions. The services that have been developed in the partnership are equally focused upon addressing the risks and needs presented by OOCDs as they with regards to court cases.
2. Risk of harm and safeguarding:
The YOT is seeking to adopt a Trauma informed approach. This approach will enable the team to get to the heart of risk and safeguarding issues and address the experiences that often underpin them. Referrals are regularly subject to a case formulation process to identify the impact of Trauma and how this can be addressed / mediated through supervision, interventions and positive activities.
The relationship and work with children's services to manage safeguarding and risk have much improved and this was reflected in the recent Joint Targeted Area Inspection and Focused Visit in Medway. They inspectorate were very positive about the work of the youth offending team.
3. Protect the public:
The YOT has maintained a monthly multi-agency risk meeting to operate, review and give oversight of 'high' risk cases. This meeting has regular attendance from our partners in children's services, the police and CAMHS and other partners.
4. Quality Assurance:
The YOT has continued to develop its quality assurance processes, particularly with an emphasis on Out of Court Disposals as these now present a greater proportion of the teams work. We have seen a consistency in practice seeing the majority graded 'good'. National standards are met and exceeded in some areas. In 2019/20, we need to move to multi-agency audits in line with the MSCP arrangements in 'working together' and 'contextual safeguarding'.
5. Workforce Development:

Staff have continued to access appropriate and relevant training both through internal and through the YJB programme of work. During 2019 the focus of the work force development has been on addressing the issue of Trauma. The team have had 2 days of training from Kate Cairn's associates regarding 'Trauma awareness' and 'Putting Trauma awareness into practice'. Following this the team had two days case formulation training. This has been an exciting development and we plan to develop this training with our partners in 2019/20 (specifically on children's services).

6. Partnership Activity:

This has continued to be strong. We have seen a greater input from partners in all aspects of the YJP and the board has given healthy challenge to partners throughout this year. In 2019/20, we need to move from good partnership working and health challenge to, 'what difference has this made' and evidence the 'outcomes' and 'implement the learning'.

7. Governance:

The youth justice partnership board has continued to actively support the YOT and its partners. The board creates a space for health challenge and in 2019 we have seen our youth voice strengthened either by attendance to the board or by video. The links with Kent Criminal Justice Board, Community Safety Partnership and others have seen focused work and bids take place. A focus of which is reducing 'youth crime' and 'serious youth violence'.

Although we can note tremendous improvements in a number of areas, Medway must continue to challenge itself against the binary reoffending rate as this is a concern and a figure we have had little impact on. We hope with improved data reporting and the development of trauma informed practice we will see in 2019/20 improvements. The board will look at this rather than reoffending separately to ensure we drive the improvements needed whilst recognising the changes and challenges the Youth Justice Partnership have with a more complex group needing support. 

Structure chart:












Delivery Plan

Strategic Priority PriorityActionLead Agency or AgenciesTimescaleSuccess Criteria.

Areas of focus for the YJPB:Binary Reoffending Figure.

OOCD and NFA (prevention and pathways).

Disproportionality (BME) and Medway changing landscape.

Key themes: 
1. Vulnerable young people (MISPERs, CME, DA, CSE and Gangs etc).
2. Safeguarding, risk and desistance







YJPB



QuarterlyReduced reoffending. 

Reduction in reoffending through triage.

Medway understands itself well and future trends. 

Improved outcomes for children reducing risk and vulnerability.


Better informed data and analysis:

Improved data analysis to inform practice, trends and strategic priorities. 
To improve the analysis of  data, so that the risk factors driving re-offending are understood and responded to in the delivery of partnership services.
Develop a joint strategic needs assessment chapter to inform future trends and areas of focus.
Work with the YJB on developing better use of YJAF and the reoffending toolkit. Also undertake visit to a local YOT using YJAF in a meaningful way.

Business and intelligence
(Michael Hood)


Public Health
(Natalie Goldring)

YOT
(Ken Dance)



Autumn 2019
New dashboard


Complete chapter on Youth Justice


Reduction in reoffending
(and binary offending)Young people voiceImprove the golden thread of young people voice both to the board but informing practice. Youth Participation and Engagement and young people experience in YJ services needs to be understood.YOT
(Davina Munn) OngoingYoung people feel they have a voice and it makes a difference.

Learning improves practice.
Improved health pathways and outcomes:Young people pathways into mental health services improves and young people accessing support in a timely way.
Young people to better access health pathways to ensure we identify educational needs (including speech and language) and wider health needs. 
Improved screening arrangements needed. Health services to better understand their role in supporting young people in the CJS. NELFT
(Gill Burns)

MCH
(Mandy Page)

Educational Psychology
(Wendy Vincent)

August 2019Reduction in binary offending.

Increase in young people accessing support.

Improved Education, Training or Employment



Serious youth violence/ crime:
Implement the successful funding bid for supporting families against youth crime.
Work alongside community safety partnership in relation to Gangs and County Lines programme of work.
Support the implementation of the Medway task force and ensure the programme supports address key areas of youth violence (PCC fully supports this programme) and integrates in wider service delivery.


Ensure suitable and appropriate accommodation meets the needs of young people in the CJS. This includes working within our provider framework.

Support the PCC develop of serious youth violence developments.KCC and Medway YOT
(Andrew Willetts)

CSP
(Neil Howlett)

Police
(Ch/Insp Marsh)

Medway YOT
(Andrew Willetts)

Housing/ Commissioning
(Rachael Horner & Mark Breathwick

Public Health 
(James Williams)September 2019

November 2019


Summer 2019




Reduction in Offending



Reduction in binary 
offences.











Work force training:

Continue to develop and deliver against our desistance model. Child first model.

Develop through our successful bid our trauma informed practice (through psychology pathways).

Develop restorative practice wider in the youth justice service including school/ academies.
YOT
(Ken Dance/ Davina Munn)

YOT & Educational Psychology
(Ken Dance and Wendy Vincent)

YOT
(Sue Holmes)
March 2020



January 2020

Reduction in Offending

Reduction in binary offences.


Improved victim support and feedback.

Implement national standards
And 
Driving Improvement to achieve outstanding outcomes for childrenChildren in the justice system often have multiple and complex needs. Where possible, we should seek to divert children from the justice system entirely and address these needs. 
For those who do offend, our core focus must continue to be; rehabilitation, tackling the underlying causes of youth offending, and delivering a system that gives children the support they need to break the cycle of offending and build productive and fulfilling lives.
We want to continue our focus on risk, safeguarding and desistance and improvements in our aassessment, plans and reviews.  

YOT 
(Senior Management)


YJP Board
(All)


Director Of People
(Ian Sutherland)


January 2020




Outstanding outcomes for children



HMIP inspection outcome.







2




(June 2017)

Page 11 of 11


