
 
Children Schools and Families 
 
 
 
Merton Youth Justice and Crime Prevention Plan 
2019-2022  	 	 	 	2019-20 update 
 
 
Author  Roberta Evans 
 Head of Adolescent and 
Family Service (YOT Manager)  Aug 2019 Approved by Rachael Wardell Director Children's Services, YCPEB Chair  Aug 2019  	 
Contents 
A. Introduction	3 
Summary of Key Achievements 2018-19	3 
2018-19 Performance:	4 
Review of Youth Justice Plan 2018-19	5 
Changes in structure, governance or service delivery	8 
Response to inspections	10 
B.  Structure and governance	10 
C. Resources and value for money	11 
Use of the grant	11 
Staffing arrangements	12 
D. Partnership arrangements	12 
Links with social care, safeguarding and risk management	12 
Commissioning arrangements	12 
Links with other government strategies	13 
Crime Prevention delivery partners	14 
E.  Risks to future delivery against YJ outcome measures	17 
Analysis of Key Performance indicators	17 
First Time Entrants reduced	17 
Offences by First Time Entrants	18 
First time entrant figures in comparison to other YOTs	20 
Age and Gender of First Time Entrants	21 
Ethnicity of First Time Entrants	22 
Ethnicity of reoffenders	29 
Custody outcomes	34 
Appendix 1 - Youth Justice Team Work Plan (2019-20)	39 
Youth Crime Prevention Plan (2019-2022)	42 
Appendix 2 - Youth Board Report          Board held:  30th May 2019	49 
YJB Good Practice Grant - Costed Delivery Plan 2018-19   (Table 1)	51 
Team Structure (Table 2)	53 
Staffing arrangements (Table 3)	54 

 
 
Contact for more information Roberta.Evans@merton.gov.uk    	 
A. Introduction 
 
Summary of Key Achievements 2018-19 
 
? Joint work with Youth Crime Prevention Board and Youth Justice Team. A number of activities have been held in preparation for inspection and to enhance governance of youth justice services. In July 2018 a 'meet and greet' session involved all staff in the team presenting a role play of the stages of the youth justice system, pre-court to post custody, followed by round table discussions. In August a Peer Review was undertaken with a neighbouring borough, involving interviews with board members, managers and frontline workers. In September the team was externally audited and this was repeated in March 2019 with positive progress identified. In February 2019 the board and team held a visioning event to identify priorities for this plan. 
 
? Participation project to create a user voice forum for the board and team. Through CCG underspend (Liaison and Diversion) this project supports young people from across the service to undertake a leadership programme and to have a voice in the Board and wider adolescent services.  
 
? Creation of single Multiagency Risk, Vulnerability and Exploitation (MARVE) panel. Following a review of panels, audit of cases and Exploitation Paper by the CSE Lead, the MARVE Protocol was established with Terms of Reference written by the chairs of the panels (Head of Service and Police DCI). The new panel and protocol has had a lot of interest from other boroughs, some coming to observe and many implementing the same or similar panels.   
 
? Successful Home Office funding (EIYF) to pilot a Responsive Community Engagement Team (ReCET). After identifying a need for more capacity to deliver community based approaches in the borough, the Youth Justice Team and 
Participation Service, with partners, bid for the Home Office Early Intervention Youth Fund. The project will engage groups of young people who present with antisocial behaviour and risk of serious violence. This includes a Contextual Engagement manager to oversee referrals and performance. 
 
? Merton chosen for 'scale up' in Contextual Safeguarding. Following a competitive two stage bidding process, Merton was selected to work alongside Bedfordshire University to implement Contextual Safeguarding. The aim is to involve social care, adolescent services and partnership agencies to develop a process for receiving referrals, undertaking assessments and intervening with peer groups, schools and neighbourhoods where there is peer-on-peer abuse.  
 
? Stakeholder engagement event on crime prevention. In March 2019 the Safeguarding Board hosted a multiagency event on adolescent risk and vulnerability, titled "Fight, Flight, Fright", that supported identification of services, a survey of worries/strengths and pledges of support from those attending.  
 
 
2018-19 Performance: 
 
Key Indicator Performance Service Target First Time Entrants (FTEs) to the Youth Justice System aged 10-17  FTE for the year: 33                                          
NB: this does not include 34 triage cases and 6 Community resolutions 
FTE from PNC cohort Oct 17 - Sep 18, rate per 100,000 10-17 yr olds = 259 (There is a difference of  - 10.7% compared to last year). 50 
(Met)  
Triage figures also reduced from 48 to 34 
 Rate of proven re-offending by young people in the youth justice system  
 Apr 16 - Mar 17 PNC Cohort:                    
Binary Rate:  51.6% - increased 6.3%  
Reoffences: 2.26 (whole cohort)  
4.38 (reoffenders) - increased 27.5%  
 
Q3 had spike of 6.91 reoffences (from 11 reoffenders). The reoffending toolkit identified 5 young people with outcomes in that quarter who went on to reoffend between 6 to 13 reoffences.  Binary rate: 
Less than 40% to re-offend (Not-met) 
Frequency rate (of cohort): 
1.10% 
(Not met) Young people within the Youth Justice System  who are sentenced to custodial disposal  1.4% [1 custody out of 70 Disposals] 
Decrease compared to 16% last year 
 
Rate per 1,000 10-17 yr olds = 0.17 
(decrease compared to last year's 0.26) 5.5% (Met)  
Increase levels of participation and achievement of 16+ young people in education, employment, training and volunteering. Total number of young people in ETE at the end 
of their order: 70%                                                 
[42 out of 60 engaging in ETE end of their order] 
 
Still higher than comparative YOTs  85% 
(Not Met) - but higher than comparative 
YOTs (43-
51%) Reduction of 
disproportionality by ethnicity compared to the population 2018/19 outcomes total 92 
39.1% (36YP) are from Black and Minority ethnicities. School population of BAME is 46% Met 
17/18 - 45.4%, 
16/17 - 49.5% 
 Compliance of YP on Court 
Orders (Referral Orders / YROs)  77% [56 out of the 73 YP] have successfully complied with their orders (not been breached) 70% 
(Met)  
Contact with victims and engagement in RJ process Contact 96.6%  
[Outcomes - 144, Victims - 60, those 
contacted - 58]  
RJ - 27.5% [16 indirect] New target  
 
 
Review of Youth Justice Plan 2018-19 
 
Complete Action from 2018-19 Youth Justice Plan Impact / Comments Utilise cost calculator and case studies to support funding bids and ongoing service provision. Presented to Department Management Team and decision to implement a  restructure across  Early Help providers to ensure ongoing provision.  Early Help maturity model review and Action Plan Completed and supported decision above  Procurement of case management system with Safer Merton to comply with GDPR / Data Protection Act 2018. Completed May 2019 - staff within AFS identified to utilise (virtual gangs and exploitation team) to support Contextual responses.  Share results of outcomes for FTE young people with partners.  Shared with Police and Magistrates via YCPEB members   Staff training in Unconscious Bias  Workers across the service attended sessions on four different dates. Some registered for training via YJB in 2019-20 INSET calendar year.    Increase the pool of mentors across the service. Two rounds of recruitment and four high quality mentors appointed.  Ongoing Forensic Psychology provision in the YJT  Vacancy filled with experienced 8a Forensic Psychologist.    Early identification through screening of NEET YP and those with SLC needs.  Continues via post-court screening clinic.  
Case studies provided for SEND YOT Quality Mark evaluation.  Substance misuse screening, assessment and interventions offered to young people.   Vacany filled and agreement with Catch22 to have two workers covering days for Youth Justice clients to ensure full cover during sickness/leave. Parents / carers are visited at the earliest opportunity and interventions offered.  All triage cases are offered home visit prior to decision on outcome.  
Post court joint visits continue as part of new PSRs / assessments.    Training on Vicarious / Secondary Trauma Two days delivered by Tavistock to whole service.  AMBIT training Whole service undertaken training, delivered by two practitioners in the service who will continue to offer to partner staff.   Expansion of clinical supervision offer CAMHS in Social Care provide 'safe space' sessions for workers across the service to discuss impact of working with complex cases.  Exploitation Protocol and Panel process to be developed  Exploitation Paper presented to Safeguarding Board, this supported new Multiagency Risk, 
Vulnerability and Exploitation Protocol and Panel. Gained interest from other boroughs who have observed to attempt implementation 
Young Person led Referral Order contracts Embedded within the process and panel members report that the engagement is greatly improved as young people have written their own report and are willing to write out their own contract.  Continue to embed the Practice model and Think Family approach across the service AFS manager attended Systemic training. 
Delivered workshops with case practitioners about some of the principles.  Service Away Day Held with whole service and supported discussion about training plan, priorities and managing funding risks.  Peer Review of Youth Justice  Board and Team managers engaged in Peer Review conducted by Sutton YOT Manager. Several positives and helpful suggestions provided. Included within Inspection SelfAssessment and action plan.  Youth Crime Exec Board and YJ staff visioning event Meet and Greet session held between all staff and board members - with a role play of the journey of the young person followed by round table discussions. Visioning event held Feb 19 that informed the Prevention priorities of this plan.   CareDirector reports to be developed and utilised to produce a 'cohort' for analysis Monthly activity reports are produced to oversee day to day management.  Quality Practice Framework updated in line with Practice model and other developments.  Updated and workshops held with staff and one worker lead on a detailed review with recommendations. To be updated further with new National Standards guidelines.  Ongoing analysis of Reoffending Cohort to identify key themes and gaps Cohort analysis completed through reports drawn from AssetPlus alongside the Reoffending Toolkit (now updated to be a quarterly cohort) Partly complete Youth Justice Plan 2018-19 Actions Comments Physical health needs of  young people are assessed and met Inconsistent use of the School Nurse and some sickness has meant not all young people are screened or assessed. This has been revisited by the Operational Manager and nurse to find ways to increase appointments.  CP Refresher training for all staff (in Appraisals) Training was included in appraisals and attendance undertaken. Will be full reviewed within Appraisal review process.  Contextual Safeguarding workshops Presentations given at Staff Forums, Strategic Boards and   Commissioning model to bid for funds Discussions held but focus has been on existing tendering priorities Development of Prevention Strategy - with focus on those under 14 years, at risk of gangs / exploitation and/or involved in persistent Antisocial behaviour Imbedded within this Plan - that will have a plan for the Youth Justice Team's activity and a plan for Prevention.  
Liaison and Diversion service well established with partners  CAMHS and SALT embedded and receiving referrals.  
Counselling provision to be established as school nurse hours could not be extended.  Parenting groups - link with Early Help offer Several parenting groups delivered and within 
Children's Centres but still to be aligned with Early 
Help offer. Appreciation of Mother's event highlighted positive impact of all the work.   Ongoing analysis of the gender and ethnicity of young people and families receiving orders, TF or CSE interventions.  Complete for Youth Justice. TF continually review referrals and Data Summary report provided.  CSE Annual Plan still to be reviewed and updated.  Implementation of Contextual Safeguarding Approach Merton successful with Scale Up Bid - will be a three year project to implement fully.  County-lines and exploitation workshops for parents One workshop held and gangs worker has supported a specific forum for parents. 
Appreciation of Mother's event highlighted positive impact of all the work.   Quarterly Service user forums for YP and parents Arranged but only two held as young people not always able to attend on the day.  Health in Justice Peer Leaders Project commenced and provider commissioned. First residential camp held with a group of young people. Second camp to be held with senior management to start identifying priorities and develop core group. Observations and joint home visits by managers Joint home visits have been undertaken and observations for students. But observations as regular practice has not occurred. Youth Justice Team has been outside of Children's Social Care audit cycle but this is being revisited.    Outstanding Youth Justice Plan 2018-19 Actions Comments Gangs case-studies to identify areas of success and learning Transforming Families cases have all had a case study and provided as part of a Profile for the Department Management Team but gangs specific cases still outstanding.   0.5 fte CAMHS provision to be secured for TF and TExT teams.  CCG have confirmed that the finance is approved - still to transfer to CAMHS for them to recruit.  LA responsibilities for a 'PACE bed' to be met. Training for EDT and frontline social workers 
may be required in regard to PACE responsibilities. Head of Access to Resources raised as part of a cross borough consortium but awaiting news in regard to potential Pan-London options. Not be practicable for Merton to lead due to very low numbers.  
EDT Service Level agreement with Head of MASH. Gangs and CSE intervention structure and protocol Still to be completed as part of the Contextual Safeguarding project implementation.  Appropriate staff-safety training Provider identified but not been able to find suitable date to deliver.   Changes in structure, governance or service delivery 
 
In March 2018 a restructure occurred and a new service manager post was created from the savings of the YJT (YOT) Manager position being deleted. The Service manager holds statutory responsibility as the YOT Manager. The service has the 
Youth Justice Team, Transforming Families Team and newly titled 'Tackling 
Exploitation Team' to provide targeted services to adolescents. The staff voted for the name of the service and it is titled the Adolescent and Family Service.  
In early 2019 a realignment of the Youth Justice Team management structure was proposed. This was due to staff changes, the anticipated inspection on Youth Justice by HMIP and a cut in MOPAC funding (creating a shortfall of £65k per annum).    
The key changes involved 
• the capacity for quality assurance oversight following the deletion of the Team Manager post that was submerged into the new Head of Service post  
• the pending retirement of a worker delivering statutory Referral Order provision (end date announced as July 2019) 
• the request to job share by an Operational manager 
• an increase in the Police seconded posts 
• GDPR requirement of Police seeking consent before victim details provided 
• a newly established Triage worker post due to changes in the HMIP inspection framework to inspect both Court and Out-of-court disposals (also requiring a dedicated management focus on this area of work) 
• education practitioner successfully securing a new position within the Education Department 
The team had also experienced a reduction in caseload. Despite a change in legislation in 2012 that meant second and subsequent Referral Orders (with guilty plea) could be made, the number of Referral Orders made each year have consistently dropped, from a high of 91 per year in 2009/10 down to 31 in 2017/18.  

As a result, the total caseload has also dropped, although the average caseload has remained stable due to less case practitioners. The below graphs represent 'current' figures as of February 2019. The caseload trend states 3.5 workers for 2019 but there was one part-time worker returning from sick leave and one vacancy, which has since been recruited to following a small but noticeable rise in caseload.  
 

 
The restructure has meant that all the post-court case practitioners and two specialist staff (parenting and CAMHS) will be managed under one Operational Manager, with a lead of 'Risk and Desistance'. This has been assimilated into by one of the current Operational Managers. A part-time Quality Assurance management post has been created to support the timely QA of assessments and support the Head of Service with audits and the review of policies. This post was assimilated into by the Operational Manager who sought a job-share. The Referral Order Co-ordinator post has been deleted and the functions subsumed into a new Operational Manager role, titled Restorative Justice and Partnerships, who will oversee recruitment and training of panel volunteers, coordinate victim engagement, manage the Triage worker, reparation coordinator, education practitioner and oversee the police officers and four part-time specialist staff. 
A new process for victim contact and victim voice has been established to ensure the first phone call, made by the Police to seek consent for contact, will be more meaningful and seek the views of the victim in the first instance. If they wish to be involved in the out-ofcourt process the officer will support this. For Referral Orders the victim can consent for the lead panel member to speak to them about what they would like shared (or invite them to the panel). For Youth Rehabilitation Orders (and where necessary Referral Orders) the victim can consent for the Case Practitioner to contact them about the plan of intervention and safety plan. For custody cases, high complex cases and direct restorative conferences, the RJ manager will take the lead in liaising with the victim and supporting the intervention.  
This restructure will be supported by Restorative Justice training, including engagement with victims and specialist sensitive restorative justice training for the case practitioners. The intended impact is a more embedded practice of victim voice and participation across the team. 
The restructure provides in year saving of approximately £23,000 and long term saving of approximately £46,000 that can cover a substantial amount of the shortfall in MOPAC funding and a small 1% reduction (£1.8k) in the Youth Justice Grant.  
 
Response to inspections 
The above restructure and activities of the board and team have been in response to the new inspection framework. Following recent inspection reports the team has recognised a need to strengthen the screening form used for Out-of-Court disposals where the gravity of the offence would support a Triage or Caution. The team has updated the Quality Practice Framework, with input from case practitioners in this process and through workshops held in response to audits. This plan is also designed to provide much of the evidence in advance for inspectors, in regard to knowledge of the cohort and wider service delivery.  
B. Structure and governance 
 
The Youth Justice Team (YJT) is a multi-agency service with case practitioners and specialist practitioners, many of whom are from partner agencies. The team is part of the Adolescent and Family Service (AFS) that sits within Children's Social Care and Youth Inclusion (under Children, Schools and Families Directorate).  The Youth Crime and Prevention Executive Board (YCPEB) acts as the 'YOT Partnership Board', which meets quarterly and takes responsibility for the management, oversight and strategic direction of Youth Justice and Prevention services, including the staffing arrangements, resourcing and delivery of services. The recent restructure received prior approval from the board.  
Performance data on key performance indicators and locally set targets is presented at each meeting, along with papers relating to relevant issues affecting the YJT and partners. The YJT contributes to the development of strategic policy for the Council on youth crime and its prevention via this Board. The core membership of the Board is as follows: 
* Director of Children, Schools and Families Department (Chair)  
* Police Borough Command Unit - lead for Neighbourhoods 
* Assistant Chief Probation Officer Merton, London Probation 
* Assistant Director - Head of Social Care & Youth Inclusion  
* Safer Merton Manager - Safer Merton  
* CCG Representative - Merton CCG 
* Head of Education - LBM 
* Appointed YOT Manager - Head of Adolescent and Family Service 
* Transforming Families Manager 
* Clerk to the Justices - Wimbledon Magistrates Court 
* Housing Needs Service Manager 
 
Any barriers to meeting key performance or effective multi-agency working are presented or raised at the YCPEB and the commitment of the partnership to meet the strategic aims of youth justice and crime prevention outcomes are held to account at this board. The YCPEB consists of members of such seniority that decisions can be made in relation to the effective delivery of youth justice services and the resourcing of such services.  
The work of the youth justice team is also outlined in the Children and Young People's Plan, which is currently being reviewed and rewritten with input from Young Inspectors and staff.  
The Youth Justice Team was a key delivery partner of the Safeguarding Board's priority of 'Vulnerable Adolescents' for the last two years. A new priority has been set this year for 'Contextual Safeguarding' and the Youth Justice Team and wider service will be supporting much of the work, alongside a longstanding priority of 'Early Help'. The service has a key role in the Harmful Sexual Behaviour Protocol, CSE Strategy and Exploitation Action Plan alongside the Serious Youth Violence and Criminal Exploitation Protocol. All of which are under the 'umbrella' of a newly established Multiagency, Risk, Vulnerability and Exploitation (MARVE) Protocol.  
The Youth Justice Team intends to meet the grant conditions by timely submission of data and placement information and completion of mandatory audits / selfassessments. The procedures for reviewing community safeguarding and public protection incidents has been redirected to the local safeguarding board and are heard / overseen by the Quality Assurance Sub-group of the Merton Safeguarding Partnership. These are also reported to and reviewed by the Executive Board. The current process is being reviewed to ensure a streamlined approach across incident notifications. The Head of Service is involved in the task and finish group for the development of this new process and relevant forms.  
C. Resources and value for money 
Use of the grant 
The Youth Justice Board's Good Practice Grant has reduced slightly (by 1%) from £199,161 down to £197,286 (a total of £1,875 that will be recovered from the restructure outlined above). Table 1 at the end of this document provides an outline of the planned usage for this grant. The total budget for the Youth Justice Team has reduced this year due to the CSE Lead and Criminal Exploitation worker being under a new separate team (in service). The payments in kind from partners has been more accurately reflected to include overheads and therefore increased. The MOPAC (PCC) crime prevention funding is not reflected as the workers are in separate teams (in the same service). The PCC funding shown below is for a Contextual Engagement Manager funded through the Early Intervention Youth Fund.  
Agency Staffing Costs Payments in kind Other delegated funds Total Police   108,000   108,000 Police and Crime Commissioner      69,186 69,186 Probation   22,500 5,000 27,500 Health   72,635 22,787 95,422 Local Authority 616,190   213,230 829,420 Wales Assembly Government       0 YJB 197,286     197,286 Other (Education) 45,380    45,380 Total 858,856 203,135 241,017 1,303,008 Staffing arrangements 
The Youth Justice Team meets staffing requirements and has: 
• two dedicated police officers  
• qualified social workers  
• a seconded officer from the National Probation service (0.5 FTE) 
• an education officer  
• a CAMHS psychologist (0.5), Nurse (0.2) and SALT (0.2) 
 
The team also benefits from a parenting officer, full-time reparation officer, seconded Substance Misuse worker (0.4) and extended provision through the Liaison and Diversion service (0.5 CAMHS; 0.2 SALT and 0.2 counselling role).  
Table 2 outlines staffing arrangements, highlighted by agency / secondment status. Table 3 provides a breakdown of staffing by contract, gender and ethnicity. 
D. Partnership arrangements 
 
Links with social care, safeguarding and risk management 
The Assistant Director for Children's Social Care and Youth Inclusion (CSC&YI) line manages the Head of Service, alongside the Service managers for MASH, First Response, Safeguarding and Child Protection, Looked After Children, Fostering and Adoption and Quality Assurance.  
The Youth Justice Team Operational managers attend the CSC&YI team manager briefings and the team is included within Children's Services training events, correspondence, quality assurance processes, local protocols and briefings.  
The Head of Service co-chairs the Multiagency Risk, Vulnerability and Exploitation 
(MARVE) panel with the DCI for Safeguarding in the Police. They both report to the 
Promote and Protect Young People sub-group of the Merton Safeguarding 
Partnership. The Head of Service attends the MASH Strategic group, Practice Development steering group, Safer Merton's Locations Board and represents the service at the Safer and Stronger Strategy Partnership (local Community Safety Partnership) and reports to the Safeguarding Children's Partnership when required. 
The Education practitioner attends the monthly Children Missing Education panel and the MOPAC workers attend the weekly Missing Persons panel. 
 
Commissioning arrangements 
• The Youth Justice Team has Service Level agreements and commissioning agreements with Catch22 (Substance Misuse service), CAMHS, the Speech and Language Therapy service and School Nursing. These are aligned with local strategies and commissioning priorities.  
 
• The CCG representative for Merton oversees the CAMHS Tier 2 Service Level agreement and the funding for the Liaison and Diversion Project. They attend the YCPEB meetings.  
 
• The Department is currently re-commissioning services for substance misuse, child exploitation, missing and detached services (under a Young Person's Risk and Resilience Service). The Head of Service is part of the task and finish group for this process.   
• The Appropriate Adult Service (TAAS) has delivered their 3 year contract (July 2014 - July 2017).  Due to changes in Police regionalisation and therefore a change from the Sutton custody suite to Kingston and Wandsworth custody suites for Merton cases, the contract was extended for one year on two occasions. Agreement has been reached with the YOT Managers in Kingston and Wandsworth for a cross-borough tendering process. This will commence in mid 2019 and a buy-back arrangement will be agreed during the interim between contracts.  
• A part-time participation worker was employed and Personal Independence were commissioned to support a leadership project to develop a group of service users who can support the board and team in their delivery. This has included an initial residential camp for the young people to form as a group and prepare for a second weekend residential camp, which included the YOT Manager, Chair of the Board (Director for Children's Services), Police DCI for Safeguarding and Counsellor with lead for Children and Young People.  
• Recent funding bids have resulted in some short-term projects for community engagement, participation work and contextual safeguarding delivery. Outlined below. 
 
Links with other government strategies 
Transforming Families is the local response to the national Troubled Families programme which includes a team of family practitioners and a gangs worker, prevention parenting worker and mentoring service. The funding will end in March 2020. The funding deadline, Maturity Self-Assessment and subsequent Action Plan are all supporting a move toward an integrated Early Help structure and referral process for those aged 0-25 across the Department. The Head of Service is involved in the Task and Finish groups for this project.  
The Adolescent and Family Service have supported or lead on bids to support the Serious Violence Strategy of the Home Office. Over the last year the Head of Service has presented local profiles and data in regard to serious youth violence, gangs, county lines and exploitation to Staff Forums, the Children's Trust, MSCB Exec Board, the MSCB Conference and a Community Engagement Event held in May 2019.  
The Director of Public Health has met with the Head of Service and Safer Merton manager to discuss approaches within the Health and Wellbeing Strategy to support the government's agenda for a public health approach to serious youth violence.  
The Head of Education Inclusion has lead on the Needs Analysis and Action Plan for the Youth Justice SEND Quality Mark. In the first meeting with Achievement for All the indicator was positive for Merton to easily achieve this. Case studies were written to support this process and identify outcomes for the SEND Inspection.  
Crime Prevention delivery partners 
The Transforming Families Team receives referrals for families who are experiencing crime and antisocial behaviour, poor health, domestic violence and abuse, children in need, poor school attendance and adult unemployment. When the team was established the service's Turnaround (prevention) team was subsumed into the functions of the team, particularly as many of the workers were from Turnaround.  
Due to a drive for integrated early help support and to plan for the end of the Troubled Families Grant, Merton is establishing a Family Wellbeing Service that will incorporate several functions from Transforming Families, 0-5 Early Years and the Bond Road Family Centre. This will provide a single referral and assessment pathway for families at the high end of Early Help and on the edge of statutory services.  
Catch22 deliver the current Risk and Resilience Service, which has priorities in regard to reducing first time entrants and reoffending. They provide a seconded worker into the service to provide screening, assessments and interventions for substance misuse. The Service also delivers a Return Home Interview and key working service for missing young people, those at risk of Child Sexual Exploitation and a Detached Youth Work service.  
A new commissioning and tendering process is being undertaken for a new Risk and Resilience provision from March 2020, which will include the above areas but expand the offer in regard to exploitation so this is not limited to sexual exploitation.    
Within the service are three specialist MOPAC funded workers, each with a specific remit in regard to Young Woman and Girls, Criminal Exploitation and Gangs. The workers liaise closely with each other in regard to the overlapping needs of this cohort and co-deliver training to the borough. The workers receive referrals from social care, schools and through the MARVE process. The funding for the MOPAC workers was reduced for the 2019-21 period but the Youth Justice restructure has covered most of the gap in funding. The cycle of funding is on a two year basis and therefore always a risk in regard to service sustainability and delivery.    
A recent delivery partner is Unique Talent, a charity company that have developed a unique offer to young people in Merton and neighbouring boroughs. They are exoffenders from the local area and provide coaching, mentoring, workshops and training. They received MOPAC funding until March 2019 and have sought further funding through serious violence strategy funding streams from Met Police/MOPAC. 
Jigsaw4U were awarded MOPAC funding to deliver victim support to young people who have been a victim of serious youth violence. They have a lead worker delivering this service who can receive referrals from schools, Police and the Youth Justice Team. They also deliver sessions with the Cricket Green (special needs) School and offer some mainstream activities. The aim is to reduce the cycle of violence due to many young people in the criminal justice system having previously been a victim of youth violence.  
Jigsaw4U also provide a weekly boxing club to support managing emotions and increasing confidence. They deliver a bereavement project and also deliver the Whose in Charge programme for parents whose child perpetrates violence in the home. They offer a programme for primary school age children and secondary school age. This is a 3 year project.  
The Youth Justice Team has continued a Service Level Agreement with Victim Support to clarify the occasions when the Youth Justice Team would support a restorative approach and when victims can be offered emotional and practical support from Victim Support, including the 'You&Co' Youth specific victim support service. 
The My Futures team, within the Education Inclusion service, remains co-located within the Adolescent and Service office Annex. My Futures provides a universal service for young people who are NEET or at risk of being NEET in the borough. The Family Therapy service was established in the My Futures Team and is now managed by the CAMHS in Social Care team but continue to deliver family therapy sessions in the same location in the Annex. In addition to the Youth Service and Catch22, these teams provide the broadest forms of crime prevention through intensive support for families and those not in education, training or employment.  
Due to the number of young people on Youth Court orders having a history of exclusions and attending the Pupil Referral Unit a review was undertaken to consider whether exclusions and attendance at the PRU was correlated with later offending by young people. This involved analysis of two years of entrants and the findings found  
• Most Smart centre pupils do not offend (only 15% after entering the Smart) 
• Slightly more pupils (17%) were already offending before they came to the Smart centre and their behaviour that led to exclusion or a move was part of their offending pattern. Offending behaviour leads to attendance at Smart. 
• The first 6 months after entering the Smart centre is crucial if we are to further reduce offending as this is the key time to offend. The review noted it takes time for the Smart centre to engage and affect the behaviour. There is no significant evidence that they will then go onto offend more over 3 years 
• Where the students arrive at Smart because they are permanently excluded (rather than a bought place, a timed intervention or an unplaced pupil) there is no discernible higher risk of offending.  
• SEN is a factor in exclusion and offending however it may be less of a factor in offending than exclusion.  
• Looked After status and Ethnicity are difficult to draw conclusions on but black Caribbean pupils disproportionately represented in the offending data.  
There is a protocol in places with schools for any young person excluded (or being considered for exclusion) for possession of a knife. They can be referred to the MOPAC workers for them to support a screening of the potential triggers and level of risk or safety of the young person.   
For a number of years the Council has supported a range of Theatre in Education 
(TiE) / workshop providers to enhance the delivery of RSE, Drug and Alcohol 
Education and Serious Youth Violence across the primary and secondary curriculum. These continue to be commissioned and to date has  included provision from: 
• ADAD theatre company (delivering Behind Closed Doors / The Morning After / Wasted TiE workshops 
• GAV (Growing Against Violence) workshops in schools 
• DSM (Daniel Spargo-Mabbs Foundation) delivering theatre performances, parents workshops and a peer ambassador programme. 
 
Merton has maintained a small number of Youth Clubs. The clubs run a host of activities to engage young people within safe spaces and to build safe relationships. The Transforming Families team and MOPAC workers deliver group work sessions and targeted activities in Phipps and Pollards. The Uptown Youth Club in South Wimbledon also engages a range of young people at risk of poor outcomes.  
The Public Health team have identified a number of initiatives that support youth crime prevention. The Public Health Strategy has streams of work titled 'start well', 'live well', 'age well' in a 'healthy place'. One aim is to have less violence. They contribute to the procurement of the Risk and Resilience Service and have supported an emotional wellbeing whole school approach with a parenting offer titled Empowering Parents Empowering Communities. There has been a drive for more Social Prescribing, with link workers in the community. Creating a link into the Youth Justice Team is an area that is being considered for this year's plan.  
Off the Record is a commissioned counselling service for young people aged 11-25 years. They also offer drop ins and online support.  
Safer Merton works closely with community safety partners to deliver the priorities of the Safer and Stronger board and the Knife Crime Action Plan, which is reviewed and updated each quarter. The actions and activities are delivered from across the partnerships. The Adolescent and Family service works closely with the ASB team to identify and target young people at risk of involvement in offending.  
Merton has been successful with an Early Intervention Youth Fund bid and are delivering a Responsive Community Engagement Team within hotspot areas, based on referrals from the ASB Team, Safer Neighbourhood Police, MARVE panel or Locations Board. The co-ordination and safeguarding oversight is delivered by a 
Contextual Engagement Manager within the service and the team is co-located in the Youth Justice Team, line managed by the Participation Service to ensure the voice of young people and affected community members drives the delivery of the service. The funding for this project will cease in March 2020.  
Merton was successful in joining the Innovation Project with Hackney Council in regard to Contextual Safeguarding. The YOT Manager / Head of Service was nominated as the 'lead' for Contextual Safeguarding and reports to the Promote and Protect Sub-group. This has resulted in an audit of current local responses to harmful sexual behaviour, child sexual exploitation, gangs and violence. The findings were presented to the MSCB and a bid was made to Bedfordshire University for the 'Scale Up' process. Merton was successful in this bid and will be utilising the support of Bedfordshire University to pilot tools and processes to assess the needs and risks presented by children, families, peer groups, schools and neighbourhoods to ensure a contextual response to addressing peer-on-peer abuse across the partnership. This project will have a direct link with crime prevention and risk reduction strategies. 
 
 
 	 
E. Risks to future delivery against YJ outcome measures 
This section outlines Merton's performance compared to previous years and compared to Regional, National and Comparative 'YOT Families'. The data, trends and analysis supports the Action Plan at Appendix 1 
 
Analysis of Key Performance indicators 
First Time Entrants reduced 

The number of first time entrants has dropped by 37% compared to the previous year. 
A similar drop was seen in Triage outcomes, which often mirror the whole cohort size. 
However there was a rise in Community Resolutions (from 1 to 9).  

This data does not fully represent the level of offending that comes to the notice of the team. However Police Merlin reports have also seen a drop, suggesting that youth crime is reducing. Comparing these with first time entrants (including Triage & CR outcomes) to the total amount of Merlin's (for those not previously known to the service) the average 'conversion' rate of cases has been maintained.  

Offences by First Time Entrants 
When considering the type of offences committed by first time entrants, a significant drop can be seen in 'Violence Against the Person' offences (with a 50% drop from 21 down to 10), many of which were weapon/blade related offences. Theft and Handling reduced (7 offences down to 2 offences) as have drugs offences (8 down to 5). The only increase has been in motoring offences (from 4 to 5). 

The Head of Service has raised in various forums with Police a concerning trend in the number of young people released under investigation and then no further action. This has also been identified as a concern in regard to knife offences. A number of hypothesis have been considered but a full analysis of data would be required and one of the priorities of the Board is to ensure better use of data, also requested by the YOT Management board representative from the Police. 
• One consideration is the impact of the changes to Bail processes (whereby bail can only be given in certain circumstances, for limited periods and signed off by senior officers). While the intention of this change is positive (to reduce the number of people subject to bail conditions waiting long periods for an outcome), the consequence has been a rise in those released under investigation with no date in place for this to be relooked at. The longer it takes to revisit the case, the less likely it will be in the public interest to prosecute. 
 
• Another consideration is the impact of 'Mi Investigation' whereby, for a number of offences, frontline arresting police officers no longer hand the investigation over to detectives but instead have to provide the paperwork for prosecution. The demand on frontline officers in their response units makes the conclusion of investigations difficult. 
 
• The impact of Police savings and the creation of Borough Command Units also needs to be considered, meaning that officers are stretched across wider geographical areas. Police savings may also have an impact on central resources, in particular the timeliness of forensics testing.   
The impact on the Youth Justice Team's engagement with young people is also an area for consideration. If a young person is released by the police without a formal outcome for months the young person may have continued to offend without intervention - making it difficult to change their behaviour. Alternatively, the young person may have made changes to their circumstances, particularly if struck by the seriousness of their behaviour and potential court outcome. Making it less likely that they will feel motivated to engage in formal interventions to address the offence.  
These concerns are particularly important if this is impacting on the number of young people formally processed for knife offences. It is proposed that the data and scrutiny in regard to first time entrants / priority groups includes those arrested or identified for carrying knives.   
Processes for identifying and supporting young people within the criminal justice system but not yet coming to notice through court to the youth offending team is being considered with Senior Police representatives. This could consider those who are stopped and searched regularly and/or are released under investigation for knife offences or other serious matters. However, any intervention would be voluntary and cannot directly involve the alleged offence as this may impact on the investigation. This could also identify and label young people who may not otherwise come to the attention or require the intervention of the youth offending team.  
Currently the MARVE panel oversees violent incidents in the preceding month and will task MOPAC workers or partner staff to attempt engagement with those involved or at risk of involvement.  
First time entrant figures in comparison to other YOTs 
The figures below, taken from Local Authority Indicative Tool, shows Merton 
historically having lower performance with higher first time entrants than National and Statistical neighbours, until 2012 when Merton started to have lower than both. In 2017 the trend changed to became on par. 
 
Below the figures (taken from YJB Yearly Data) show a similar trend, with Merton now higher than the YOT Family average (based on 10 YOTs chosen as statistical neighbours by the YJB) but lower than National and London population figures.  

Every Youth Offending Team within the 'YOT family' have seen decreases, with Merton having a similar decrease (26%) to the average across the YOTs (28%). 
 
Age and Gender of First Time Entrants 
The majority of First Time Entrants were 17 years old last year. Over the last four years the majority have been 15 to 17 years, with the majority in this age group being male. There is more similarity between genders in the lower age ranges.   

The following table shows the ages of First Time Entrants within each gender, over the last four years. The most common age for both boys and girls is between 12 to 14 years but the largest cohort is 15 to 17 year old boys. This raises questions about whether girls are treated differently when they are older or if different behaviours are used as coping strategies or responses to triggers for different genders when older. This raises questions about the triggers for offending for older boys (e.g. perceived financial pressure or lack of maturity) or if 'growing out of offending' is earlier for girls than boys. Regardless of the reasons, there is a stark difference and therefore supporting older boys to avoid entry into the criminal justice system requires action.  

Ethnicity of First Time Entrants 
The ethnicity in 2018-19 is more similar to two years prior than the year before. Particularly in regard to Asian young people entering the youth justice system.  

 	 
Disposals for First Time Entrants based on offence / ethnicity: 
Last year the pre and post court disposals were analysed in regard to offence type and ethnicity. This showed a significant disproportionate response for Black young people compared to White young people, as seen below. This exercise was repeated and shows more diverse responses across all offences, as seen on the next page. 
2017-18 Figures 
These results demonstrated that in every offence category (other than drugs) Black young people were disproportionately receiving court outcomes when White and Asian young people were receiving pre-court outcomes:   

These results were shared with Police colleagues and Magistrates via the representatives at the Youth Crime and Prevention Executive Board.  
 
 
2018-19 Figures 
Last year's results demonstrated a much more diverse response to young people across all offences. The following offences were not compared as they were all committed by White young people (Criminal damage, Public Order and Racially Aggravated assault). Last year Theft was excluded for this reason.  

In regard to weapon offences - all received a post court outcome. 
These will continue to be monitored each year to ensure proportionality continues. 
 
Referral Order analysis 
 
As outlined at the start of this document, the number of referral orders have reduced year on year. In 2018-19 they reduced further (from 31 to 23). This reduction was also seen within the year, with only three Referral Orders in the last quarter.  

The majority of young people receiving a Referral Order complete their order, with only 22% revoked for reoffending (and 13% yet to complete). Where ever possible early revocation for good compliance is encouraged but last year only 13% (3) were successful in achieving this.   
The type of offences committed by young people receiving referral orders continues to see a significant number with weapons offences.  

Reoffending by young people on formal disposals 
Merton's reoffending rates have varied throughout the years but the 2016 cohort saw a significant spike in reoffending, well above statistical neighbours.  
 
The most recent statistics available from the YJB annual data returns shows that Merton has seen an anticipated reduction but is still higher than all others, remaining well above London, England and statistical neighbours in the 'YOT Family' 

The worst quarter for Merton was Q1 (Apr to June 16) with 65.4%. While the same quarter the following year is higher than the average, it shows a significant drop - particularly in comparison to other boroughs (with comparative YOTs seeing a rise). 

 
This drop in reoffending is also against a fairly stable (slightly reducing) cohort size.  

 
Reoffending by outcome 
Using the reoffending toolkit from 2016-17 and splitting the cohort based on outcome type it is clear that those on a community court order have the highest reoffending rates (71% compared to only 24% of those receiving Triage outcomes). 
 
It is well established in Ministry of Justice data that those with previous offences are more likely to be at risk of reoffending and that this increases exponentially with each additional offence. Therefore it is not surprising that there is such a difference between those that receive Triage (where no previous offending is more likely) and those receiving a community sentence (where previous offending and outcomes are more likely). However, it does create a more difficult task for the youth justice team when managing these young people. Furthermore, of the fifteen young people in the postcourt community cohort that reoffended, 73% (n11) were Looked After. Therefore requiring close working relationships between youth justice and social care teams, while open to the youth justice team and beyond as many are now care leavers and require ongoing support to access opportunities as young adults. 
Average number of offences committed by young people who reoffended 

Unfortunately the number of re-offences committed by those that do reoffend is increasing and the latest annual figures are higher than London, National and YOT Family averages. However, it appears that this may be due to just one quarter that in the 2016-17 cohort (quarter three, Oct - Dec 16) with 6.91 re-offences. For that quarter Merton was the fourth worst in the country and the worst in London.  

The Quarter three figure comes from just 11 young people committing an astonishing 76 offences. When reviewing the reoffending by these young people there a number of motoring offences (that can count as 5 offences in 1 incident) but there was also four individuals that had committed nearly half the offences (n36) and one young person alone had committed 16 offences. These young people were presenting to a number of services due to complex needs and unfortunately attempts to provide an integrated plan were difficult or, once in place, were too late.  
Ethnicity of reoffenders 
 
The ethnicity of young people entering the youth justice system is predominately White (56% in 2016-17 and 54% in 2017-8 and slightly lower at 52% in 2018-19).  

 
Therefore it is not surprising that the highest re-offending group are White young people (based on the last two available cohorts for analysis - based on whether they reoffended within 12 months of entering the cohort).  

When the cohort is separated by ethnicity and the reoffending within each of these groups is analysed, there is a similar level of reoffending within each offending cohort.  
The change in reoffending for the Asian cohort is most likely due to a significant rise in Asian young people entering the cohort in 2017-18 (18 young people compared to 9 young people the year before). This figure is again 8 young people in 2018-19.  
The change in level of reoffending for young people of Mixed ethnicity is due to a very small cohort (1 out of 3 reoffended from the 2016-17 cohort, 2 out of 4 reoffended in the 2017-18 cohort). 

 
Ages of those reoffending 
The largest cohort each year are those aged 17 years or more. However, the numbers entering the youth justice system are decreasing each year, except for 15 year olds. 
   

As would be expected, 17 year olds therefore make up the biggest age group in the cohort of young people who reoffend. Although the last cohort has shown a more equal proportion across the age groups - with a significant rise in 15 year olds. 
 

When considering the rise in proportion of reoffenders who are 15 years old, this is particularly significant since this age group did not see a reduction in cohort size to explain a change in proportion.  
This age is identified as a crucial time when young people are facing GCSEs and, anecdotally from the MARVE panel, young people at this age often want to work and earn money but have less or limiting opportunities, which can increase the risk of offending to gain income. Creative responses to education routes is seen as a priority by the YCPEB for the crime prevention plan. 
When breaking the cohort into different age groups and reviewing the rate of reoffending in those groups, the highest reoffending is seen with the youngest.  

Barriers to desistance / needs of young people 
Below is a summary of assessments completed during the last year on young people subject to court orders and youth conditional cautions (n53). Of those assessed 52 had a judgement in regard to Likelihood of ReOffending (LoR1), Safety and Wellbeing concerns and Risk of Serious Harm to others. The remaining 2 cases had an assessment in process.  
 
Likelihood of Reoffending
Safety & Wellbeing
Very high	TBC
4%	2%Risk of Serious Harm
Very High	tbc
2%Consistent to last year, these demonstrate that very few young people present with low risk or concern in regard to reoffending, harm to others or adverse outcomes.  
As shown below, there is also an overlap in regard to likelihood of reoffending and risk of harm to others. The majority present with medium to high risks in both areas with just 15% (n8) presenting with low risk of harm and low likelihood of reoffending, while 25% (n13) present with high risk of serious harm and likelihood of reoffending. These young people require more frequent contact and more robust interventions, with oversight by the Multiagency Risk, Vulnerability and Exploitation panel.  

The needs of young people assessed during 2018-19 also indicates a high level of vulnerability. In particular in regard to Speech, Language and Communication Needs, Mental Health and Substance Misuse in addition to home life and relationships.  
Areas of Concern (from assessments 2018-19)
Barriers to Engagement
Other behaviours
Justification of Offending
Gangs
Parent's Care ability
Family's behaviour
Relating to others
Where live
Significant relationships
Physical Health
Substance Misuse
SLCN
Mental Health
	0%	10%	20%	30%	40%	50%	60%	70%	80%	90%	100%
	Yes	No	yet to clarifyThese present significant barriers against desistance and highlights the challenge faced by staff to support young people to overcome complex needs in order to reduce their likelihood of reoffending or causing harm. The Youth Justice team continues to focus on embedding a trauma informed approach with systemic principles of collaboration and young person led plans but robust risk management and positive joint working is also a priority.   
 
 	 
Custody outcomes 
 
Merton has returned to its high performance in regard to custodial outcomes. Last year saw just one custodial disposal, which is a significant drop compared to the previous year (n16 - 7 young people).  

 
 
The rate per 1000 has dropped from 0.4 down to 0.06. 

 
This is also positive compared to London and National figures 
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00Jan
15 -
Dec
15Apr
15 -
Mar
16Jul 15
- Jun
16Oct
15 -
Sep
16Jan
16 -
Dec
16Apr
16 -
Mar
17Jul 16
- Jun
17Oct
16 -
Sep
17Jan
17 -
Dec
17Apr
17 -
Mar
18Jul 17
- Jun
18Oct
17 Sep
18Jan
18 -
Dec
18Apr
18 -
Mar
19 Merton0.300.300.300.180.240.240.240.350.350.400.340.290.170.06 London0.710.680.700.770.770.810.770.720.720.670.640.580.530.49 London PCC Area0.710.680.700.770.770.810.770.720.720.670.640.580.530.49 England & Wales0.430.410.410.420.420.440.430.410.400.370.340.320.320.30 
While custody reduced, the remands increased from 0 the year before last to 4 young people last year. Although this is not as high as previous years. These remands were for serious violent offences (primarily GBH).  
Remands to Youth Detention 
2018-19 Number of YP Total nights SCH 1 41 STC 2 146 YOI 1 135 Total 4 322  

Ongoing serious youth violence and criminal exploitation 
Serious youth violence incidents, involving young people and young adults, have been tracked since March 2017. The trend, as shown in the table below, is for incidents to spike at different time during the year, the highest being Q3 of 2017/18. In that period the incidents involved a number of retaliations between two groups of young adults. The service saw a return in serious youth violence incidents involving Merton young people / young adults in Q1 (April to June) 2019. A small number of these involved young people known to the youth justice team and have resulted in critical incident notifications.  

A significant complicating factor is that over the last few years most spikes in incidents have been interlinked in regard to rival groups retaliating against each other, however this year's incidents are more disparate and unrelated, making it more difficult for gangs and serious youth violence workers to intervene with key individuals and groups, which has previously been managed with successful results.   
Traditionally a significant number of incidents of violence involving weapons do not involve young people subject to interventions (and some incidents involve both young people and young adults). Last year there were two young people open to court orders who were stabbed. Between April to July 2019 four young people on court orders have been stabbed. These are being escalated through incident notifications and appropriate reviews.  
Overall this is presenting a worrying trend in serious youth violence that has led to a rise in s60 interventions and is occurring prior to the usual periods of high concern (summer and autumn nights).  
Communication has commenced with BCU Police in regard to initiatives to support the local Knife Crime Action Plan and attempt to analyse the spike in significant incidents. The use of safe and secure intelligence and information sharing across the AFS teams, Safer Merton and Police teams is a priority. The Service and Safer Merton have successfully procured a case management system that will meet this need. The system is named eCiNs. The benefits of such a system are not currently met by any of the IT systems within Merton and workers / managers are reliant on documents being shared in panel meetings (held only monthly) or via emails, which can miss out key professionals or delay efficient tasking.  
As can be seen from the table below, the west side of the borough is experiencing the highest proportion of incidents, in particular Cricket Green and Figgs Marsh wards (the areas are commonly identified as Phipps Bridge, Mitcham or Mitcham Eastfields). The Mitcham Town Centre is currently a priority for the Safer and Stronger Executive Board. Data Analysts in Safer Merton are also maintaining a monthly report in regard to all priorities for this and Locations board.  

Since the launch of the Multiagency Risk, Vulnerability and Exploitation Protocol the service has seen a rise in referrals for young people at risk of exploitation, in particular county lines Class A drug dealing. The earlier figures are confirmed cases of 'county lines' and later referrals are those accepted on the panel due to risks or evidence. 

The number accepted on panel this year (as of June 2019) is already 9 children and young people.  
The rise in criminal exploitation is also impacting on the staff's capacity to reduce the level of reoffending by young people due to the perceived benefits from the income, the level of trauma they experience when being coerced or entrapped and the fear when arrested due to debts they need to pay back from confiscated drugs and cash.  
The impact on staff dealing with high levels of violence, anxiety and fear was recognised and the service commissioned trauma training for workers that focuses on identifying secondary trauma and self-management techniques. This was delivered by the Tavistock and attended by the CAMHS in Social Care team who are supporting the service with ongoing 'safe space' sessions. 
  
Funding  
Troubled Families Funding  
Phase two of the national TF initiative is set to conclude on 31 March 2020. The MHCLG Families Team is in discussions with Government ministers about the programme benefits and cost savings, but no decision has been made with respect to continuation beyond March 2020.  
As a result of the risk of redundancies a report was prepared for the Departmental Management Team to outline the current funding situation and a number of options for ongoing provision of intensive family support. This paper was supported by a Case Study Profile of a number of families that achieved progress and outcomes, with direct feedback from young people and families included in the report. The decision has been to undertake a department wide restructure of Early Help services, which will include the Transforming Families Team's functions. This is to ensure a reduced impact on the prevention and early help offer for families in the borough.    
 
MOPAC funding 
The three MOPAC posts (gangs, criminal exploitation and young women and girls) are funded for a further two years to March 2021. However, the amount available has been reduced and therefore the Youth Justice restructure is supporting the maintenance of these worker's roles and functions. 
 
Local Authority funding 
The Director has outlined to staff that the whole council is faced with reductions in its core funding, and the Children, Schools and Families service cannot escape the requirement to find ways either to generate income or reduce expenditure. The Department has a target of £3.6million savings over the next four years, and of that sum, still have £2.6million to find. Following a review of expenditure by Impower the Department is deemed to be overall a relatively low-spending, high performing directorate. This means there are not many obvious places to look to for further savings. This is there likely to hit all services, including the teams within the Adolescent and Family Service.   

Appendix 1 - Youth Justice Team Work Plan (2019-20) 
Action / Activity Key Theme  
(Continuous 
Improvement, User 
Voice, Equalities, 
Workforce 
Development) By When? Who - including Interdependencies 
(internal / external teams or services) Intended Impact  Reduction of re-offending and overcoming barriers to desistance Identification and application of evidence-based approaches (utilise College of Police 'what works' research) Continuous 
Improvement 
Workforce 
Development Mar 2020 All staff and managers 
Workforce 
Development Team Workers are consistently applying the best known methods of interventions to reduce crime. Ongoing Forensic Psychology provision in the YJT  Continuous Improvement Ongoing CAMHS 
CCG, YJ Operations manager, AFS manager Young people access high-quality support to manage their mood, stress, triggers to violence and emotional wellbeing.   Early identification through screening of NEET YP and those with SLC needs.  Continuous Improvement ongoing ETE Worker and SALT ETE providers, MyFutures.  Young people engage with education opportunities and overcome communication barriers Substance misuse screening, assessment and interventions offered to young people.   Physical health needs of  young people are assessed and met Continuous Improvement ongoing Catch22 
School nursing 
SPECTRA Young people understand the impact of substances and have strategies to reduce this harm. Young people are registered with a GP and receive appropriate health advice. Parents / carers are visited at the earliest opportunity and interventions offered.  Continuous Improvement ongoing Parenting worker Transforming families team. MST / FFT. Parents have strategies for managing the behaviour in the home and for overcoming their own barriers to supporting their child.   
Implementation of Contextual Safeguarding Approach Continuous Improvement Sep 18 AFS Manager 
Safeguarding and Care 
Planning, IROs, MSCB Application of tools for assessing and intervening with peer groups and communities influencing and causing the harm to others.  Implementation of AMBIT approach Workforce 
Development March 2020 AFS trainers for AMBIT 
Head of Service 
L&D Team Workers equipped with variety of effective tools to support trauma informed interventions.  Ongoing case discussions and use of 'safe space' Workforce 
Development / 
CI Ongoing All staff and CAMHS team YJ staff receiving the input of clinical supervision to have safe spaces to discuss the impact of their work Enhancing the participation of victims in safety planning Meaningful first phone call with victims when seeking consent for contact Continuous improvement Embed by Nov 2019 Police Officers 
RJ Manager  To ensure that victims have the opportunity to hear the outcome and give consent at the earliest opportunity Establishing pathways with Victim Support and Jigsaw4U young person support User Voice Nov 2019 RJ Manager, Victim 
Support and Jigsaw4U To reduce any delays in victims receiving timely and appropriate support Receiving feedback from victims receiving support services to ensure these influence ongoing service delivery User Voice Annual report RJ Manager Victim 
Support and Jigsaw4U To ensure that the service and partners respond to the feedback from victims Refresher Training for all staff, including panel volunteers in regard to Restorative Justice, engaging victims Workforce 
Development Sept 19 - Nov 19 RJ Manager  
AFS Manager 
Trainer availability To ensure that case practitioners and panel volunteers are ready to engage directly with victims to inform the plans 
Training for case practitioners in complex and sensitive restorative justice processes Workforce 
Development Feb 2020 AFS Manager / RJ Manager  
Trainer availability, worker capacity and readiness To support a trauma informed response to those involved in peeron-peer abuse.  Co-collaboration of services Quarterly Service user forums for YP and parents User Voice Quarterly AFS Managers 
Staff to support engagement Ensure a high quality service, influenced by young people.  Continued use of young person led RO contract and YRO planning forms User Voice Ongoing - Review Nov 19 YJ Managers 
Operations Manager 
(SGP) / RO coordinator Increase compliance and reduce reoffending due to increased engagement and motivation.  Health in Justice Peer Leaders established and influencing in the team and the YCPEB User Voice Feb 2020 AFS Manager 
Participation Team and 
CCG Enhanced delivery of Prevention, Liaison and Diversion, pre-court and youth justice services. Delivering high quality services Utilise management reports to oversee day-to-day practice Continuous Improvement Monthly Information officer and 
YJ managers Ensure that the YCPEB and YJ Management team are aware of the trends and demands of the cohort. Quality Practice Framework updated in line with new National Standards  Continuous Improvement Aug 19 AFS Manager  YJ Managers Improved practice with vulnerable and complex young people.  National Standards Audit to benchmark practice in line with the new standards Continuous Improvement Feb 2020 AFS Manager 
YJ QA Manager 
CSC QA Manager Ensure practice is evaluated in line with the updated Standards.  Ongoing analysis of 
Reoffending Cohort to identify key themes and gaps Continuous 
Improvement 
 Quarterly YCPEB Targeted response to young people 
with repeat and persistent offending.  Complete the SEND Quality Mark self-assessment and production of case studies Continuous Improvement Sep 19 Education Inclusion  Commissioning priorities Appropriate Adult contract across BCU (with buy back system in interim) Continuous Improvement Aug 19 4 borough YOT managers and ASC managers. 
Commissioning team. Ensure a consistent service is delivered to the custody suites used across the BCU Careworks Upgrade and review of case management system Continuous Improvement July 19 IT Team, Corporate services, commissioning team To ensure fit for purpose case management system that delivers statutory duties.  Youth Crime Prevention Plan (2019-2022) 
Closer Joint Working relationships Consider best practice approaches for young people at risk of care / custody and/or in Police Custody. Share learning. Continuous 
Improvement / 
Workforce 
Development Sep 2019 AD and Heads of Service in Children's Social Care 
Joint Working Working 
Group lead by HOS 
Quality Assurance Young people are supported to be safe and act safely within their families and communities.  Undertake service wide audit of joint cases - baseline and review Continuous 
Improvement / 
Workforce 
Development Sep 2019 baseline Mar 2020 review Team Managers across Children's Social Care and Youth Inclusion - collaboratively with workers Identify best practice and areas for improvement for cases open to both Youth Justice and Social Care. Learning through audit process.  Review and update Joint Working Protocol with Social Care  Continuous improvement Nov 2019 YJ Manager Risk & Desistance, 14+ Team manager (lead for YJ), First Response Team 
Manager, SGCP Team 
Manager Improved outcomes for those open to both the Youth Justice and Social Care.  Joint Working Protocol to include update with Education processes Continuous improvement Nov 2019 AFS Manager 
Head of Education 
Inclusion and SEND Improved outcomes for those open to Youth Justice and 
Social Care and SEND teams. Workshops and 
Briefings for staff as part of launch of Joint working protocol Continuous 
Improvement / 
Workforce 
Development Feb 2020 YJ Manager Risk & Desistance, 14+ Team manager (lead for YJ), First Response Team 
Manager, SGCP Team 
Manager Ensure that staff are aware of the principles and expectations. Early Help Restructure - consultation and implementation Continuous improvement July 2019 launch, October 
2019 conclude, Feb 2020 estalbish Head of Early Years and AFS Manager All services across Merton 
to be involved Integrated and improved services for vulnerable children, young people and families.   Consider and plan for any gaps or opportunities in regard to crime prevention following restructure of Early Help services. Continuous 
Improvement 
Equalities Feb 2020 Managers in AFS 
Social Care 
Police 
YCPEB Ensure that ongoing provision of youth crime prevention services are embedded or provided for as part or alongside of the restructure.   	 

Early Mental Health Pathways Explore best intervention models to reduce the effects of PTSD on children witnessing / in fear of violence Equalities Oct 2019 
Implement 
2020-2021 Head of Education 
Inclusion, CCG and AFS Manager  
Public Health (link with Health and Wellbeing strategy).  Reduce the levels of trauma (and reduce victim to offender cycle) for vulnerable young people.    Liaison and Diversion service enhanced to include counselling   Continuous Improvement Sep 2019 CAMHS worker and 
SALT, RJ Manager 
Police to ensure early identification.  Reduce the number of young people with mental health or SLC needs on court orders. 0.5 fte CAMHS provision to be secured for TF and TExT teams. Consider referral routes via the PRU  Continuous Improvement Oct 2019 CCG commissioner 
(outstanding from 2018/19) 
CAMHS Service Early and easily accessible (colocated) support for YP vulnerable to criminal behaviour.  Parent awareness sessions in primary schools  Continuous Improvement Sep 19 - July 2020 TF and YJ parenting practitioners  Early Help Service Parents aware of signs and triggers to reduce risk taking behaviour  Utilise Social 
Prescribing for young people in Youth Justice processes Continuous Improvement Establish  2020-21 YCPEB Public Health member 
School Nurse in the 
Youth Justice Team Creative solutions to enhance mental and physical wellbeing Best use of data to target, divert and prevent Scrutiny panel in regard to Knife offences and timeliness of charge Continuous Improvement Establish by March 2020 Police DCI lead for Knife 
Crime Plan, TF 
Manager, YJ Manager Reduce knife crime through swift and proportionate action 
Utilise eCINs for case management of violent incidents  Continuous Improvement Commence  Sep 2019 MOPAC workers and 
Safer Merton  
AFS Manager Better understanding of trends, 
connections and areas of priority Ongoing analysis of priority crimes Continuous Improvement Ongoing Safer Merton analysts Police and AFS  Identify trends for priority actions Monitor prevalence of serious youth violence incidents Continuous Improvement Ongoing Policy and Performance 
Manager, MSCP Manager  
Promote and Protect 
Young People Subgroup Ensure that any changes in trend are responded to quickly.  Utilise MARVE panel to identify young people with emerging indicators of youth offending / violence Continuous Improvement Ongoing MARVE Panel members 
(Police, Education, 
Health, AFS), Catch22, 
Early Help Team, Jigsaw4U as delivery partners.  Divert and prevent young people from entering the youth justice system Map crime prevention services available to pupils and residents Continuous Improvement Feb 2020 Contextual Engagement Manager  
Early Years Families 
Information Service Reduce duplication and have a full offer across schools.  
 Update Serious Youth Violence Protocol following data reviews Continuous Improvement April - June 2020 AFS Manager, Police, Safer Merton, Promote and Protect, Safer and Stronger Ensure protocols and procedures reflect the needs of the borough Sign off / Update / 
Maintain all Information 
Sharing Agreements Equalities 
Continuous 
Improvement  Dec 2019 AFS Manager 
Information Governance 
Team Ensure information is captured, recorded, shared and stored safety as per GDPR. 
Addressing disproportionality Scrutiny panel for Out of Court Disposals Equalities Established March 2020 RJ Manager, YOT 
Police and Magistrates Ensure fair and proportionate disposals Appropriate Adult contract to include scrutiny and challenge for charging decisions Equalities Tendering Nov 2019 
Aim June 2020 Appropriate Adult 
Service, AFS Manager, 
Commissioning Team To ensure young people have every opportunity to receive a fair outcome.  Exclusions rates to be monitored for disproportionality Equalities Annual report Education inclusion and 
Pupil Referral Unit  
Head Teachers To ensure proportionate responses to young people presenting with challenging behaviour. Ongoing analysis of the gender and ethnicity of young people receiving YJ services. Equalities Quarterly 
Dashboard, 
Annual report All managers 
Partner agencies 
(Police, Education, Early 
Help) 
Data analysts Ensuring that there is no bias in the recognition, referral or response to young people in the YJS. 
 Creative Education Solutions  Develop more vocationally led provision and value non-academic work pathways Equalities 
 March 2020 - 2021 Head of Education 
Inclusion, 
Commissioning for Education  
RJ & Partnerships 
Manager and YJ ETE 
Worker, My Futures 
Team Provide opportunities to gain work skills, legitimate income and sense of self-worth.  
Enhance Restorative Justice offer to priority schools Continuous Improvement March - July 2020 RJ manager, require source for funding Heads of Schools To reduce the use of exclusions wherever possible.  Engaging young people when the GCSE curriculum begins Continuous Improvement Ongoing Education Inclusion 
MyFutures, Education 
Welfare, YJ ETE worker Support young people that may struggle with exams and become dejected. Continue to review offending population in Smart Continuous Improvement Annual report PRU and Education 
Inclusion, Data analysts Ensure that risk of offending is reduced following exclusion from mainstream school  Think Family  Summary of Merton's Housing Offer to be created and shared Continuous Improvement Oct 2019 Head of Housing Workers and families have access to easy to understand information about what is available and under what circumstances Establish relationship with all Housing Associations Continuous Improvement March 2020 Contextual Engagement 
Manager, 14+ 
Managers, YJ Managers Opportunities for support, safety and projects are utilised for most vulnerable families.  Establish access to Sanctuary Scheme when threats of violence present Continuous Improvement Feb 2020 Housing Manager MOPAC Workers Providing safe havens within the family home to avoid need 
for rehousing  Maintain Whole Family Working approach Continuous Improvement Ongoing Think Family lead 
DWP - continue offer 
 'Know How' document for 
frontline practitioners  Workers know indicators and how to support Early Help restructure leads 
Risk and Resilience commissioning Practice model for Early Help restructure to ensure whole family working 
Commissioning services to ensure direct work includes whole family working model 
 Review the Domestic 
Violence offer in Merton Continuous Improvement Oct 2019 Safer Merton, Children's Social Care 
Commissioning team Reduce the number of young people experiencing violence at risk of 'victim to offender' cycle.  Ensure an ongoing 
offer to families that meet the TF criteria Continuous Improvement March 2020 Early Help task and finish group leads Reduce impact of the loss of the Troubled Families Programme and funding. 
Support the implementation of 
Early Help offer as per TF 
Matrix Model Advice and Guidance available in Children's Centres to be 'all ages' Continuous Improvement March 2020 Family Information 
Service hubs (FISH) 
New Family Wellbeing 
Service Ensure that families receive the right help and information at the right time in the right place.  Utilise Barclay's Bank Life Skills Courses 
Consider programme of mentors from the 
Council Continuous Improvement March 2020 Education commissioner 
Family Wellbeing 
Service 
Contextual Engagement 
Manager Support parents, older family members and teenagers to access opportunities and learn skills to navigate these.   	 
Appendix 2 - Youth Board Report 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	Board held:  30th May 2019 
Date forum held Recommendations Actioned? Impact (views of most recent board) 2nd June 2016  
(7 participants) 
16th Feb 2017 
(5 participants) 
12th April 2018 
(5 participants) ? If different workers have different roles then they should focus questions on their own area  
o Specialist workers don't need to ask about family 
 issues o Case workers need to spend time to know me Feedback shared with workers and specialist staff Don't like having to meet new people 
Didn't like idea of screening clinic but once here it was ok.  
 16th Feb 2017 
(5 participants) 
1st Sep 2017  
(1 participant) 12th 
April 2018 
(5 participants) ? Home visits feel awkward - especially with family.  
o Be mindful of who around.  o Don't treat like an investigation.  o Take out for lunch would be nice. o Ask before a visit if there is anything that don't 
want to discuss Feedback shared with workers Don't like too many talking at once 
 
Focus on Youth Board on Crime Prevention offer - see below  
12th April 2018 (5 participants) • Would like to be rewarded for doing well 
• Should be more than 3 warnings 
• Reduce appointments when possible Feedback shared with workers. Quality Practice 
Framework updated with youth board views in introduction. Session with workers clarified compliance policy and also National Standards in regard to reducing appointments after 3 months.  Like activities, like how workers helped with CV and getting back to college 
When worker is kind and nice then don't want to let them down 
Should simplify - say what have to do, how do and don't keep explaining ("by the time walked down the stairs my nan had explained what happened in an hour long meeting") 
Much of the discussion supported many of these staying in place.  • Less talking and more practice sessions.  
• Important to keep the sessions relevant and interesting. 
• Don't be repetitive, have variety - "Switch it up" 
• If say don't like something then listen to this (like doing a silly game or just talking all the time) • Reception - needs a TV and more inviting / welcoming 
• Be good to have WI-FI code 
• The corridor needs a fan or ventilation Have redecorated reception 
Put Wi-Fi code up 
Sign about stairs and offer to meet at Link put up Air vents added to the corridor and aircon being sorted in Annex Find reception welcolming 
Stairs 'done me' - the tube is sizzling when it's hot weather. However, wouldn't want to go to the Link, "It's calm the way it is" 
  	 
Youth Board Action Plan  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Date forum held Recommendations Actioned? Impact (views of most recent board)  
12th April 2018 (5 participants) • More practical sessions.  
• Important to keep the sessions relevant and interesting. 
• Don't be repetitive, have variety - "Switch it up" 
• If say don't like something then listen to this (like doing a silly game or just talking all the time) 
• Like activities and help with CV 
• When worker is kind and nice this helps   30th May 2019 (3 participants) Should simplify  
- say what have to do, how do and don't keep explaining   Prevention suggestions. We need / needed: 
• Someone to talk to when first get into trouble 
• Best if someone who has been there and changed - who is calm 
• Activities - to be out of the area and have something to do 
• Need more things to do to earn legitimate money 
 
 
    	 
YJB Good Practice Grant - Costed Delivery Plan 2018-19   (Table 1)  
 
Grant total: £197,286 
Staffing: 	£197,286 
 
Activity/Resource Measurement Outcome supported             Developing Good Practice Costs 
 Management 
oversight Team / Operational manager posts 
(1.0fte)  Reduction in FTE 
Reduction in custody 
Reduction in reoffending Effective Public 
Protection 
Effective Safeguarding • Induction, supervision and appraisal of staff 
• Quality Assurance of assessments, reports and plans 
• Championing responses to safeguarding, harmful sexual behaviour and partnerships  
• Attendance at YJB Practice development and Performance Improvement Meetings 
• Overseeing Service level agreements with partner staff. 
• Supporting RJ workers with expanding approach in the borough (schools, police & social care training). 
• Continual review of Court practice via court meetings 
  
£60,000 Team 
Administrator - Pre / Post Court 
Information  0.6 of position  Reduction in custody 
Reduction in 
reoffending 
 • Maintaining the reoffending toolkit. 
• Presenting Pre & Post court information to allow practice development / trend information  
• Performance data and information relating to First time Entrants / Reoffending / ETE / Accommodation   
• Analysis of the link between substance misuse and offending to inform practice and Area Needs Analysis  £37,000  	 
Activity/Resource Measurement Outcome supported             Developing Good Practice Costs 
 Reparation officer 
 1.0fte 
 Reduction in FTE 
Reduction in custody 
Reduction in 
reoffending 
 • Provision of group work programmes for Triage cases to support reduction in FTE 
• Facilitating the Youth Forums to increase user voice 
• Expansion of Reparation projects to support activities that provide AQA awards and volunteering opportunities to support desistence / reduction in offending. 
• Provide robust and bespoke reparation projects to support ISS to reduce use of custody £41286 
 
 Court Officer 1.0fte Reduction in custody Reduction in first time entrants 
 • Maintain relationship with Court services and deliver consistent and reliable service that ensures representation of the Youth Justice Team and trust in the services delivered by the team.  
• Increase 'front door' consistency and engagement with young people first entering the youth justice system to ensure accurate signposting to prevention services and Liaison and Diversion Youth provision.  £45000 Management 
Boards - Youth 
Crime Prevention  
Executive Board  4 times each year - cost of staff time  Reduction in FTE 
Reduction in custody 
Reduction in reoffending Effective Public 
Protection 
Effective Safeguarding The Youth Crime & Prevention Strategy Group (YCPEB) is a high level multi agency forum consisting of Senior Managers responsible for the work of the YOT Partnership of whom the Youth Justice Team is the principal operational member. The Board will oversee Merton's response to new legislation, the Inspection regime, its local crime reduction & prevention initiatives, monitor issues concerning risk and safeguarding and ensure staff & resourcing levels are in place to maintain performance and effectiveness within the Youth Justice Team. £14,000 Total    £197,286  	 
Team Structure (Table 2) 
 
 
Staffing arrangements (Table 3) 
 
Type of Contract Strategic 
Manager 
(FT) Operational 
Manager 
(FT) Operational 
Manager 
(PT) Practitioner (PT) Practitioner (FT) Administration (FT) Sessional 
 
 Volunteers Students/ Trainees Total Total 1 2 1 7 7 4 1 12  35 Vacant     2  3   5  
 
Gender & Ethnicity 
Ethnicity Strategic Manager  Operational Manager  Practitioners Administrative Sessional Students Referral 
Order Panel 
Volunteer Volunteer Total   M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F Asian or Asian British                               1 0 1 Black or Black British         2 4                 2 4 4 8 Mixed                                 0 0 Chinese or Other                                 0 0 White or White 
British   1 2 1 1 7   4   1         2 3 5 17 Total 0 1 2 1 3 11 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 4 8 9 26  
The ethnicity of staff appears to be proportionate to the ethnicity of those entering the offending cohort. However there is over representation of female staff when the majority of young people are male. This is mitigated through the use of prevention partners, who provide a higher ratio of male staff in many services or projects.  
1 Low LoR = less than 44% chance; Med LoR = 44 - 76% chance; High LoR = 77 - 100% chance  
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

Page 1 of 54 

Page 1 of 3 

Page 1 of 54 

Page 39 of 54 

Page 39 of 54 

Page 39 of 54 

