
Monmouthshire & Torfaen Youth Offending Service
YOT Plan Cymru 2019/21 - 19/20 plan

The Youth Justice Plan Cymru for Monmouthshire & Torfaen 2019/21 is produced in accordance with the statutory duty for each Local Authority to formulate and implement a Youth Justice Plan each year (s.40 Crime and Disorder Act 1998).  The plan sets out:
* How Youth Justice Services in Monmouthshire and Torfaen will be provided and funded; and
* How the Youth Offending Service will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out. 
The plan adheres to the 'Youth Justice Plans: YJB Practice Note for Youth Offending Partnerships' (YJB, May 2019) and the 'YOT Grants Terms and Conditions 2019/20.'
The content of the Youth Justice Plan Cymru for Monmouthshire and Torfaen focuses upon and addresses the following areas: 

*  Introduction and overview of 2019/20
* Structure and Governance
* Resources and Value for Money 
* Partnership Arrangements
* Risks to Future Delivery Against the Youth Justice Outcome Measures
* Action Plan 2019/20 (to be updated 20/21)









Overview of 2018/19

In accordance with the 2017 - 2019 Youth Justice Action Plan the YOS have, to date, successfully:

* Continued to utilise the 'live tracker' to identify, monitor and review current offending behaviour trends.  
* Provided ongoing training / guidance to staff to ensure the effective use of AssetPlus to support Case Management and developing a more streamlined use of AssetPlus for early intervention cases.  
* Developed 'accredited programmes' to increase the employability of young people subject to statutory interventions with the YOS.
* Established access to the Monmouthshire LEA database to ensure that accurate and up to date ETE information is available without delay for the purpose of completing assessments and intervention plans to meet individual need.  In the process of developing a protocol to access the Torfaen LEA database. 
* Continue to monitor young people detained in custody under PACE via the Gwent Monitoring and Review Panel and disseminated learning.
* Continue to develop restorative practice in line with Restorative Services Quality Mark.
* Streamline the range of reparation projects available to meet the needs of the service.  
* Agreed a new YOS financial agreement with partner agencies.
* Training has been provided to the whole service to create a psychologically informed environment to embed trauma informed practise in the organisation. This has included ongoing skills development sessions provided by the Gwent Attachment Service. 
* Devised and implemented a revised Out of Court Disposal Protocol to be used on a regional basis with the aim of reducing first time entrants into the Criminal Justice System. 
* Further developed Prevention Services and processes within the YOS by developing links with the early intervention panels in Monmouthshire and Torfaen.  
* Agreed a protocol with Children's Services to ensure the YOS is represented at all strategy meetings as appropriate (CSE, sexually harmful behaviour). 
* Recruited and trained Youth Justice volunteers.  Extensive training has been provided. 
* Extended the contract for the provision of Speech, Language and Communication practitioner in the service. 
* In the process of extending the use of Viewpoint across the whole service to promote service user participation.  This is a web based service that better engages young people who use social media.  
* Updated the Appropriate Adult Protocol across the Region.
* Updated the Court Service Level Agreement.
* Completed an Adverse Childhood Experiences Audit across all cases open to the service. 
* Commitment to ensure all social work staff complete the practice teacher award.
* Further develop the Protocol for Children who are Looked After across the region.  
* Completed development work on a service wide basis around the new National Standards
* Developed and implemented a Gwent Wide Health Pathway document which includes a new lateral checks process for all young people coming into the service.
* Commissioned training on the risk of young people becoming involved in radicalisation, Modern Day Slavery and Child Trafficking. 
* Whole service complete Ask and Act training around domestic abuse issues. 
* The YOS participated in the HMIP Joint Youth Resettlement Inspection at Parc Prison.
  
Whilst CSPPI Community Safeguarding and Public Protection Incident are no longer being monitored by the YJB, developmental work in this area is being undertaken by the Gwent Service Managers.  There has been one incident that would fit the CSPPI criteria during the period and learning from this has resulted in improvement of safeguarding processes through the increased involvement in strategy meetings. 




Structure and Governance

Monmouthshire and Torfaen Youth Offending Service covers the boundaries of two Local Authorities, Torfaen County Borough Council and Monmouthshire County Council.  The Youth Offending Service is hosted by Monmouthshire County Council and sits within the Social Care and Health Directorate.  All non-seconded staff are employed by Monmouthshire County Council.  This provides consistency in terms of conditions of service and general human resource management.  The YOS Manager is line managed by the Head of Monmouthshire Children's Services.  
The Local Management Board is chaired by the Chief Officer, Social Care and Housing, Torfaen County Borough Council, with the vice chair position being assumed by the Head of Monmouthshire Children's Services, thus ensuring appropriate representation and level of decision making/influence across both Local Authority areas.  There are representatives from each of the statutory partners on the Local Management Board.  The composition of the Local Management Board is set out in appendix a).  There have been no changes in personnel in 2018/19.  
The Local Management Board meets on a quarterly basis and is timed in order to correspond to the availability of ratified and confirmed performance information, which forms a standing agenda item. Financial matters and planning continue to be a standing item on the Local Management Board agenda.  

The Local Management Board continues to assume ownership and responsibility for the strategic direction of the YOS. Some of the LMB business plan includes financial reporting / planning, performance measures, progress against relevant action plans and overall capacity and capability. 
  

In July 2019 the Youth Justice Board Senior Advisor - Oversight and Support has attended the Local Management Board to discuss management board governance for the Youth Offending Service.  

The YOS has a new Service Manager who been seconded from Torfaen Children's Services.      

The three Gwent YOS' are represented on the Gwent Safeguarding Board by the YOS Manager for Blaenau Gwent and Caerphilly.  The Gwent Safeguarding Business Unit encompasses Children and Adults. 
The Board, which includes adults and children has identified a 2019 - 20 strategic plan:
* The effects of compromised parenting on children's mental health and well-being
* Safeguarding in adolescence. 

The above promotes early links to improve trauma informed practice.  
There exists a joint working agreement between the YOS and the two Local Authority Children's Services departments.  This document has incorporated the key responsibilities as laid out within the All Wales Child Protection Procedures and the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.  











Review of Performance - 2016/17
First Time Entrants





The YOS has made significant progress in reducing the number of young people entering the Youth Justice System since 2015.  The latest verified data evidences a decrease of 181 young people from January to December 2017 compared to the same period in 2018.  This represents a reduction of 51%.  The rate of first time entrants per 100,000 of the 10-17 population is 175 compared to Gwent  which is 266.   Thus the rate per 100,000 for Monmouthshire and Torfaen is significantly lower than Gwent and the Welsh YOS average.  
The YOS attributes the significant reduction of FTEs since 2015 to its investment in prevention and early intervention services.  We would expect this trend to continue due to the review of the Out of Court Disposal Protocol (implemented in October 2018). Hopefully this protocol will address the previous discrepancies in protocol eligibility criteria regarding the use of community resolutions and out of court disposals.  



Rate of proven re-offending by young people in the Youth Justice System



Due to the tracking processes, timescales involved and the manner within which the information is collated and reported the re-offending data is not contemporary and provides an indication of trends and potential future direction of travel within Monmouthshire and Torfaen.  

There were 136 young people in the July 2016 - June 2017 cohort.  Of these 136 young people, 64 re-offended, committing a total of 355 re-offences.  Therefore 47.1% of the cohort re-offended (binary rate).  This represents a decrease of 6.4%.  




The frequency rate of re-offending has increased from 4.22 to 5.23  when comparing the July 2016 - June 2017 cohort with the previous year.  The frequency rate for both Gwent and Wales has increased during this period.   




Although the binary rate is higher than both the Gwent and Wales averages, the actual number of young people offending has increased from 54 reoffenders (15/16) to 64 (16/17).   The frequency rate has increased from 4.22 to 5.23.  
In conjunction with the Youth Justice Board, the YOS has utilised the 're-offending toolkit' to analyse re-offending and continues to develop the live tracker to track those young people most likely to reoffend. This, along with Police data is facilitating a quicker response to any further offending episodes from young people already being supervised by the YOS. 
The YOS is also developing trauma informed practice and it is hope that this will have the potential to reduce reoffending rates in the future.  

Young people receiving a conviction in Court who are sentenced to custody



Analysis of custody and associated performance from 2014/15 highlights a 50% reduction in the number of custodial sentences followed by a 33.3% increase in custodial sentences in 2015/16.  There were 5 custodial disposals in 2016/17. During the time period 2017/18 there were 4 custodial sentences which shows an on-going reduction.  During the 2018/19 period there have been 3 custodial sentences which shows a further reduction. 

It should be noted that due to the small numbers involved, any small increase or decrease can represent a disproportionate % variation.  In Monmouthshire & Torfaen, the custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 year olds in the population has increased slightly. However, it remains lower than the national average


.

Remands (Youth Detention Accommodation)
The YOS performance in terms of use of remand (although not a key performance measure) has previously been varied although, as above, as numbers of young people are relatively small, any slight variation can lead to a disproportionate % increase. The number of remand beds used in 2016/17 had increased by 51% when compared with the previous year.  However, 2017/18 shows a reduction of 46 % which is a substantial drop in remands and continues with a generally consistent downward trend since 2013/14. The increase in 2018/19 is due to a Monmouthshire Torfaen young person who moved to another Gwent YOS to live with a close family member who was previously involved in crime. Due to the already poor engagement of this  young person, the relatively short travel distance between the two areas and given the positive relationship built over years with his family, Monmouthshire Torfaen YOS continued to case manage the young person. The young person was then implicated in serious property crimes with other adults at his new address, which resulted him being remanded from 28.4.18 until 31.8.18, at which point he received a custodial sentence. 
There was 1 other young person remanded in custody for serious offences, for whom a highly restrictive  ISS Bail package was put together and he was given ISS bail after 5 days  in custody.
 
Bed nights (YOI)Bed nights (SCH)Bed nights (STC)Total bed nights % change2012 / 13666072-51%2013 / 1423700237+229%2014 / 1515400154-35%2015 / 164351967-56%2016 / 1780210101+51%2017 / 18505055-46%2018/  1912400124+125%
Access to suitable accommodation

A total of 28 young people had a community based penalty that ended in 2018/19, of which 27 young people (96%) were in suitable accommodation at the start of their intervention and 26 young people (92%) at the end. This represents a slight decrease, however this relates to 1 young person who refused to cooperate with offered accommodation options. 

1 young person ended a custodial sentence during the period, and this young person was in suitable accommodation at the start, release and end point of their intervention (100%).
    
A closed disposal within the period does not necessarily correspond to the end of YOS involvement with a young person.  In some cases, the end of a community order is as the result of a new order being imposed (thus revoking the existing order).  Consequently, in the majority of cases there will be evidence of continued agency support to resolve accommodation issues.  

The Resettlement and Reintegration Panel is utilised to address the individual accommodation needs of young people.  Any themes/ongoing issues are escalated to the Local Management Board.  Further work is required to ensure that suitable accommodation is identified at the earliest opportunity.   


Engagement in Education, Training and Employment






For the whole of 2018/19 to date the average hours being offered to school age young people at the start are 15.0, at review 19 and at the end and are 12, all falling below the recommended 25 hours. This represents a reduction on last year's hours.  However, it is encouraging that, at the end of the intervention, 91% of hours offered were taken up.  The YOS is continuing to work with Senior Officers in both Local Authority areas to address this issue. 

Above Statutory School Age: 

For the whole of 2018/19, for above school age young people the average ETE engagement is 12.5 hours at the start, 10 at review point and 12 hours at the end of intervention.  The average hours being offered to this age group are 12.5 hours at the start, 10 hours at review point and 20 at the end. This represents a significant improvement with regards to 2017/18 data.

Two 17 year old young people were released from custody during this period. The first young person was extensively prepared prior to release, was supported through a construction training programme and was then taken on as a full-time apprentice. He was part of the recent HMIP Resettlement inspection at Parc YOI (report pending) and noted as an example of good practice particularly in regard to having alternative pathways identified if the main plan fails. 

The second young person released had been uncooperative at Parc, including refusing to attend reviews and often having to be seen in his cell by YOS staff.
Despite these challenges a number of bespoke packages were put in place to attempt to meet the young person`s needs and interests. However, the young person failed to engage with the ETE component of his DTO.

The YOS ETE Officer Post (filled in March 2017) has been significant with regards to the significant improvements in securing suitable provision and engagement with young people.  

Within 2017/18 SLA between the YOS and Careers Wales has been reviewed.   

The YOS has access to the Monmouthshire LEA database.  Work is underway to establish access to the Torfaen LEA database. These will ensure that accurate and up to date ETE information is available without delay. An Information Sharing Agreement has been devised and signed off in Monmouthshire and is ongoing in Torfaen. 



Access to appropriate specialist assessment and treatment services
The YOS Substance misuse worker is seconded from Barod who took over the existing contract in July 2007.  The YOS Substance Misuse worker attends a weekly joint allocation meeting (JAM) where more complex cases are discussed and the level and type of support is reviewed. This process has resulted in young people having quick access to additional support with identified complex needs and provides a seamless transition between intervention tiers. 

13 Monmouthshire Torfaen young people with more complex needs were formally discussed at the JAM and 4 outcomes involved consultation and intervention recommendations to the worker; 7 were allocated and engaged with a tier 3 worker, one of whom, a 17 year old, was then identified as having a previously undiagnosed Autistic Spectrum Disorder, which was having a significant impact on his ability to engage and was subsequently  able to access appropriate support and address his substance misuse; two young people required a residential mental health provision.


During 2018/19 a 17 year old young person with complex  needs was supported to move out of his local area  and  a joint Health and Social Services funding package was agreed to fund  a 6 month residential drug rehabilitation placement, which the young person successfully completed. The YOS continued to support the young person whilst out of area and his order was revoked early for good progress. 
 
During 18/19 13 young people were identified as requiring a substance misuse assessment, 7 were referred to the substance misuse worker, of which   3 refused to engage in the assessment and 4 receiving an being  assessment within 5 days of referral.  (100%) For those that refused to engage in the assessment, substance misuse awareness work was still addressed by the case manager.

Of the 4 young people requiring a substance misuse intervention 3 (75%) received this service within 10 days.  This is a reduction on the previous year.  However, this is a small cohort and the 1 young person who did not commence treatment within the 10 days had failed to keep the offered appointments. 

There is a current SLA with Barod who are also providing the substance misuse training for YOS staff and will also cover any periods of absence by the seconded worker. 



Mental Health / Emotional Well-being
The objective of the Mental Health performance measure is to report the percentage of children and young people in the Youth Justice System identified requiring a mental health assessment: 
a) Receiving a mental health assessment within prescribed timescales and 
b) Receiving mental health treatment within prescribed timescales of assessment (where the need for treatment has been identified). 
Improvement in this area is a key strategic aim of the Welsh Government/YJB Children and Young People Strategy.
During 2018/19 all those requiring an assessment (10 young people) were assessed within the required 28-day timescale. 2 were identified as requiring treatment and both commenced this service within the required 28-day timescale. 
Aneurin Bevan University Health Board provide a Clinical Nurse Specialist from Specialist CAMHS to sit within the Youth Offending Service.  The referral pathway includes a mandatory consultation between the YOS Case Manager and Clinical Nurse Specialist for all young people to ensure appropriate screening of emotional and mental health.  
The Gwent YOS Health Pathway has been reviewed in 2019 with Aneurin Bevan Health Board and has resulted in a new process has been set up to ensure that all health information is captured via a lateral checks process with regards to all young people receiving a service from the YOS.  This information is available for the assessment process.  
Monmouthshire & Torfaen YOS are in the process of developing Trauma Informed Practice, with the support of the Gwent Attachment Team.  Developmental work regarding the full implementation of an Enhanced Case Management Model is ongoing across the Gwent region and it is a priority action for Monmouthshire & Torfaen YOS to ensure this approach is embedded in practice and sustainable post 2020, when progress will be reviewed.



Victims and Restorative Approaches
The YOS continues to be committed to providing a quality service to all victims and developing the use of restorative approaches both within the service and across the Local Authority areas.  
The YOS Police Officer makes initial contact with all identified victims where the menu of restorative options is discussed and agreed.  A large proportion of this initial consultation is done via a personal visit to the victim.  
All staff working with victims have received the 21 hours RJ training by officers trained by an accredited RJ Trainer.  The newly appointed YOS Volunteers have all received the 21 hours RJ training.  
The YOS has a website for all YOS services/activities.  The 'Victims and Restorative Justice' page includes a contact and feedback section to encourage suggestions for reparation projects.    A link to the YOS complaints procedure is also included on the website.  
The YOS have joined Twitter to improve communication with victims and the community and are exploring other social media opportunities.  
The YOS have continued to develop the Restorative Approaches for LAC project across Gwent with a view to reducing the prosecution of Looked After Children.  
The YOS have received positive evaluations from families following family group conferences facilitated by the YOS.  The family group conferences provide families with the option to find creative solutions to the problems they encounter. 
The YOS are in the process of developing electronic evaluation of restorative work via the Viewpoint system.   
The YOS continues to be successful in working in partnership with a number of stores and local businesses to prevent young people from being banned following offending / anti-social behaviour. 
The YOS were previously successful in obtaining the Restorative Service Quality Mark (RSQM) and continue to work to improve the quality of services to victims across the region.  




Resources and Value for Money
Following the budget cuts in 2016/17 the financial contributions to the YOS have remained stable.  The YOS Financial Agreement has recently been signed by all partners for a 3 year period.  

See appendix c) for a table showing the financial, staffing and in-kind contributions.  



In previous years there has been varied underspend of the YOS budget via partner contributions that has enabled the YOS to establish a 'financial reserve' to account for future unforeseen expenditure.  The reserve maximum amount has been set with any additional amounts being credited back to partners.    

The YOS has been successful in securing continued funding from Welsh Government via the Promoting Positive Engagement for Young People (at risk of offending) Fund (formerly the Youth Crime Prevention Fund).  The fund currently supports the following YOS projects:

> Prevention, Resettlement and Reintegration Project across Monmouthshire & Torfaen 
> Restorative Approaches for LAC Project across Gwent.  

Criteria to funding streams within Torfaen has been altered which may impact on future service delivery.

The OPCC has maintained their 2019/20 contribution at the same rate as 2018/19 despite previous indications of a three-year reduction at 33% per annum.  

In addition to the funding made available to the YOS for the provision of services as outlined above, for the period 2018/19 the YOS / Local Authority areas has been provided with a remand budget of £22,251 which is ring fenced specifically for the use of remands within the defined period.  The amount for Remand Grant for 2019/20 is £19,285.

The YOS continue to schedule monthly development sessions for Case Managers as part of the APIS (Assessment, Planning, Intervention and Supervision) programme.  These sessions have largely focussed upon AssetPlus since implementation.  Operational Managers and Senior Practitioners have recently attended training on AssetPlus (Less is More).  This is to develop good practice within the service, particularly around early intervention cases and staff resources.  

The YOS are delivering accredited Aim 2 assessments and intervention programmes to address harmful sexual behaviour.  The programme has recently been accredited for working with female offenders and young people aged between 10 and 12 years.  Further training is being resourced to ensure that all Case Managers can deliver the updated programme.  Links with partner agencies are being strengthened as a result of this programme and will enable the YOS to deliver assessments and interventions to reduce harmful sexual behaviour at the earliest opportunity.  
A process has been agreed with Torfaen Children's Services regarding YOS attendance at all Child Sexual Exploitation, Criminal Exploitation and Harmful Sexual Behaviour Strategy Meetings for the purpose of information sharing, even if the case is not open to YOS. This process will also be replicated within the Monmouthshire SSD area. 
The YOS is developing referral pathways with Early Intervention Panels in both areas.  This is resulting in an increase in referrals to the Prevention Service.  
The YOS is currently considering accommodation options to reduce costs in relation to costs to the service.
The YOS is resourced in line with minimum staffing requirements set out within the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. 












See appendix d) for a breakdown of staffing by agency, gender and ethnicity. 



As has been highlighted in previous years, the lateness of confirmation of grant funding, particularly the value of the Youth Justice Grant, has limited the continued ability to plan consistently and on a longer term basis.  As our grant funding is continues to be under threat it is more important than ever that our statutory partners maintain their commitment to the service.  Their commitment is demonstrated with the new 3 year Financial Agreement. 

Contributions (cash only):


AGENCY
2015/162016/172017/182018/192019/20YJB 241,717219,324220,201220,201218,127PCC44,00029,48029,48029,48029,480Monmouthshire CC346,547346,547346,547366,449418,258Torfaen CBC359,763359,763359,763380,424434,209Police66,79166,79166,79170,62780,612Probation53,05426,6875,0005,0005,000Health65,31465,31465,31469,06578,830Welsh Government254,000242,000242,000242,000242,422
TOTAL
1,431,186
1,355,906
1,335,096
1,383,246
1,506,938


Partnership Arrangements

Monmouthshire and Torfaen Youth Offending Service covers the boundaries of two Local Authorities.  Monmouthshire represents as a predominantly rural and affluent area with some small, but proportionately densely populated towns. Torfaen represents a more urban area with Cwmbran tending to represent the hub with a number of smaller towns/villages within the county.

Geographically, Monmouthshire covers a vast area with a population of approximately 91,300 (census 2011) (representing an increase of 6,056 since 2001 census) with Torfaen having a more condensed area and population of 91,100 (census 2011) (representing an increase of 151 since census 2001). As a result of the geographical and demographical make up of each Local Authority the joint working arrangements are deemed to represent efficiency and effectiveness in the provision of services across the two areas. 

The YOS areas fall within what was once regarded as Gwent.  Gwent Police, Aneurin Bevan University Health Board (ABUHB) and Her Majesty's Court Services cover the historical Gwent area and three Youth Offending Service areas cover the area of 'Gwent' (namely Newport YOS, Caerphilly & Blaenau Gwent YOS and Monmouthshire & Torfaen YOS).  The three YOS Managers meet regularly in order to examine and plan options for collaborative working. There exists a range of local projects, sub regional and regional projects across the three Gwent YOS areas with there being a drive towards more regional collaboration in line with the Gwent footprint and some of the terms and conditions of the Promoting Positive Engagement for Young People (at risk of offending) Fund. 

Similarly, the Community Safety Grant provided to the YOS via the Office of Police and Crime Commissioner is now provided on a regional basis with a focus on substance misuse and victim work. To this end there is collaboration across the three Gwent YOS areas to promote common practices and principles within this particular service. 

There are several other initiatives and practices that promote partnership and collaborative arrangements within the Monmouthshire and Torfaen areas, within the broader Gwent footprint and across Wales both at strategic and operational levels.   

> The YOS manager is a member of YOT Mangers Cymru, which meets in order to share good practice, discuss policy implications and devise joint responses considering wider strategic and political issues that impact upon the functioning of Youth Justice.  The YMC terms of reference were reviewed in 2019.  Constitution. 

> The YOS Local Management Board consists of a broad range of agencies/partners and is appropriately represented. Due to the line management and hosting arrangements of Monmouthshire CC it is deemed appropriate for the chair to originate from Torfaen CBC and vice chair from within Monmouthshire CC. 

> The seconded YOS manager continues to be line managed by the Head of Children Services within Monmouthshire. In addition to the line management that takes place, the YOS manager also meets on a regular basis with the Chief Officer, Social Care and Housing within Torfaen. 

> There is a Gwent wide regional Safeguarding Children's Board which one Gwent YOS Manager attends on behalf of the three Gwent YOS areas. Sub groups and regional groups are attended by Monmouthshire and Torfaen YOS management team.  

> An Operational Manager/Service Manager attends relevant Children Services management team meetings for both Local Authorities.

> An Operational Team Manager attends the Early Intervention Panel (SPACE) in both areas.  

> The YOS Manager attends the Safer Monmouthshire Group and inputs into the Monmouthshire strategic needs analysis and Single Plan via this forum.

> The three Youth Offending Services in Gwent are represented at Safer Gwent by the YOS Manager for Blaenau Gwent and Caerphilly YOS.

> The YOS Manager attends the Gwent wide Criminal Justice Strategy Board. 

> The YOS Managers across Gwent meet regularly with senior representatives of Gwent Police.


> There is a Gwent wide process document for the administration of Out of Court disposals via the developed Gwent wide Bureau and Out of Court Disposals framework incorporating the Bureau Process for Children across Gwent.   Changes in relation to this model were implemented in October 2018.  

> A Gwent wide scrutiny panel for Out of Court Disposals (youth and adult) continues to monitor the use of Out of Court Disposals and report to the Criminal Justice Strategy Board.

> A YOS Operational Team Manager will represent the three Gwent YOS' at the Gwent Regional Collaborative Committee. 

> The YOS manager is a member of the Gwent MAPPA Strategic Management Board and represents the three Gwent YOS areas. 

> The YOS Manager is a member of the Regional Integrated Offender Management Board and represents the three Gwent YOS areas. 

> A YOS Operational Team Manager attends the Regional Integrated Offender Management Steering Group.

> A YOS Operational Team Manager attends the monthly Integrated Offender Management Migration meetings. 

> The YOS Police Officer attends regular Neighbourhood Policing meetings share and gather intelligence. 

> A YOS Operational Team Manager attends monthly Serious and Organised Crime meetings. 

> The YOS has an identified Prevent lead (Operational Team Manager).  YOS staff received training/awareness and refresher sessions are planned for later this year.

> A YOS Operational Team Manager attends the Supporting People Group.

> The YOS Manager is represented on the Positive Pathways Group in Torfaen and an Operational Manager sits on the Management Board for the local Pupil Referral Units and the Keeping in Touch group.  

> A YOS Operational Team Manager attends the ASD Stakeholder Group.

> The YOS Information Officer attends the South Wales Information Officer Group (SWIOG). 

> The Newport YOS Manager represents the Gwent YOS' at the Gwent Area Planning Board 

In line with Welsh Government guidance, the three Gwent YOS' have established a monthly monitoring and review panel to review all cases where children and young people are held overnight in Police Custody (post charge). 

> The three Gwent YOS areas commission joint training where required.

> Service Level Agreements / joint working protocols / MOUs exist between the YOS and: 


* Children Services (Monmouthshire and Torfaen)
* Local Education Authorities (Monmouthshire and Torfaen) 
* Careers Wales
* Barod (formerly Drug Aid Cymru) - SLA agreed 2018
* HMCTS (Gwent wide) - reviewed in 2019
* CAMHS (Gwent wide) - reviewed in 2019 
* ABUHB for the provision of a Speech and Language Therapist (Gwent wide) - reviewed in 2019

> The YOS host a multi-agency Prevention Panel where all referrals are discussed and intervention plans agreed

> The YOS host a multi-agency Resettlement and Reintegration Panel

> The YOS host monthly Risk Panel Meetings for all high risk (re-offending and serious harm) cases


Risks to Future Delivery
There are numerous risks and potential challenges ahead in terms of service delivery: 

* The continued uncertainty regarding ongoing funding for the Youth Offending Service is a constant risk as it relates to continuation of service delivery.  Year on year notification of funding makes medium to longer term financial planning difficult with uncertainty of external grants having a significant impact upon this. Coupled with this, the often late notification of external grant funding means that there is inevitable disruption via uncertainty at the end (and sometimes beginning) of the subsequent financial year.

* The continuation of financial pressures placed on statutory partners has, thus far, had a minimal impact upon Monmouthshire and Torfaen YOS.  As continued pressures are placed on partners, particularly Local Authorities there are anticipated financial implications for the YOS core funding. This has been improved due to the 3 year financial agreement.   As our grant funding remains under threat it is more important than ever that our statutory partners maintain their commitment to the service.  Following the scoping exercise upon models of improved collaboration between the 3 Gwent YOS', it was decided a regional YOS would not be pursued at this time. 


* The complexity of YOS funding, with grants that include a range of differing and similar terms and conditions has and continues to present its own challenges. Whilst some funding is linked solely to specific projects, they generally impact upon overall service provision within the YOS area. This presents a continued challenge as it relates to overall financial management.  There are potential opportunities and risks associated with the flexible funding pathfinder. 

* The development and implementation of AssetPlus has and continues to represent a significant change and consequent challenge for the YOS.  The YOS are currently ensuring that all assessment processes comply with YJB specifications.  The YOS is currently working with the YJB to streamline the asset plus assessment for early intervention cases.

* The LMB are being proactive and creative in considering ways in which we can ensure the future sustainability of the service.

* Developing and embedding practice in light of the new National Standards. 





Monmouthshire and Torfaen Youth Offending Service Action Plan 2019 - 21



ActionTimescaleRAGReducing First Time EntrantsIntroduce a stream-lined Asset Plus for Community Resolutions and Prevention referrals.  April 2020To further develop referral pathways from Early Intervention PanelsDecember 2019Monitor the revised Gwent Out of Court Disposal model and analyse performance information in relation to this.October 2019Ensure the effective oversight of  prevention, community resolutions and out of court disposals by Local Management BoardJuly 2020Reducing Re-offendingFurther develop the use of the 'live tracker' to identify, monitor and review 'prolific offender' cohort. OngoingTo further develop the implementation of the Enhanced Case Management model across Gwent
Ongoing
Continue to develop the use of YOS performance information to create timely responses to changing reoffending patterns.

January 2020

To develop a Gwent wide performance data set to ensure good practice is shared across the region. January 2020Continue to provide ongoing training / guidance to staff in the use of the Asset plus to support effective Case Management.OngoingIdentify and strengthen desistence pathways with other agencies.  July 2020Continue to develop interventions available to the YOS to target identified offending behaviour trends and 'hotspot' activity.OngoingReducing the use of custodyContinue to have an audit and lessons learnt analysis of all remand/custody cases and disseminate learning with partner agencies.  April 2020Access to suitable accommodationTo continue to participate in Supporting People Forums and Complex Case Planning Meetings to further progress supported accommodation for young people with behavioural difficulties.  OngoingEngagement in Education, Training and EmploymentTo further develop the use of 'accredited programmes' to increase the 'employability of young people subject to statutory interventions with the YOS December 2019Establish access to the LEA database in Torfaen to ensure that accurate and up to date ETE information is available without delay for the purpose of completing assessments and intervention plans to meet individual need.January 2020Access to appropriate Substance Misuse ServicesTo provide training to all new YOS staff and annual refresher training for existing staff, including current trends.July 2020Ensure that all initial assessment appointments are appropriately supported by the YOS case manager to increase engagement
October 2019HealthTo monitor the use of the new Lateral Checks process to ensure all checks are completed in line with GDPR.
December 2019Safeguarding To provide ongoing Appropriate Adult training for YOS volunteers and staff as required.OngoingTo embed a process regarding YOS attendance at Strategy Meetings for CSE, CCE etc.January 2020Identify obstacles to LA PACE transfers via Gwent Monitoring and Review Panel and disseminate learningOngoing Agree regional processes for managing CSPPIsApril 2020Public Protection Arrange bi-annual MAPPA training events OngoingEngage in ViSOR process - establish access to ViSOR for YOS Police and Probation secondees.

Establish access to ViSOR for YOS Case Managers and Operational Team ManagersDecember 2019


December 2019Review understanding of social media and young people, and establish if there is sufficient local policy and practice guidance for staff to operate effectively and legally when monitoring young people's social mediaDecember 2019To further develop trauma informed practice which will include ongoing training for YOS staff.   OngoingTo continue to ensure that local practice guidance and resources available for responding to social media related offending addresses current behaviour of young people January 2020Victims and Restorative ApproachesReview the range of reparation projectsDecember 2019To develop an electronic evaluation form for victims engaging in restorative interventionsDecember 2019To continue to develop quality restorative processes (as per RSQM Development Plan)April 2020ParticipationDevelop the use of Viewpoint to obtain feedback from young people, families and victims. December 2019To develop feedback from young people via a partner agency event.September 2019Misc.Review staff training record to include new training pathways. June 2020Support and retain community volunteers to facilitate Referral Order panels, support community reparation and act as Appropriate Adult for young people in Police CustodyOngoingRecruit new volunteersApril 2020















Appendix a)
NameAgency representingPost in agencyEthnicityGenderKeith Rutherford  (Chair)Torfaen County Borough CouncilChief OfficerWhiteMaleJane Rodgers             (Vice Chair)Monmouthshire County CouncilHead of Children ServicesWhite FemaleNigel SpaceyHer Majesty's Prison and Probation ServiceTeam ManagerWhiteMaleAdam EdwardsAneurin Bevan Health Board Mental Health Advisor
WhiteMaleIan Roberts Gwent PoliceSuperintendentWhiteMaleSharran LloydMonmouthshire County CouncilPSB ManagerWhiteFemaleJacalyn RichardsMonmouthshire and Torfaen YOSService ManagerWhiteFemaleRob LongMonmouthshire County CouncilAccountant WhiteMaleMandy OwenTorfaen County Borough CouncilElected MemberWhite FemalePenny JonesMonmouthshire County Council Elected Member WhiteFemaleJosh KleinMonmouthshire County Council Head of Youth ServiceWhiteMaleKaren KerslakeTorfaen County Borough CouncilInformation and Communications Manager, Public Service Support Unit.WhiteFemaleDavid WilliamsTorfaen County Borough CouncilHead of Youth ServiceWhiteMaleTracy TuckerTorfaen County Borough CouncilHead of Pupil Support and PartnershipsWhiteFemaleRichard AustinMonmouthshire CCPrincipal Inclusion OfficerWhiteMalePatty WysomCareers WalesArea ManagerWhiteFemaleEleri ThomasOffice of the Police and Crime CommissionerDeputy Police and Crime Commissioner for GwentWhiteFemale


Appendix b)

Appendix c)
Table 1: Partner contributions to the youth offending partnership pooled budget 2018/19
 
AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Local authority*£0£0 £746,872£746,872Police Service£52,497£0£70,627£123,124National Probation Service£27,044£0£5,000£32,044Health Service£40,406£0£28,659£69,065
Police and crime commissioner**£0£0£29,480£29,480YJB Practice Grant£0£0£220,201£220,201Welsh Government£0£0£242,422£242,422Other***£0£0£0£0Total£119,947£0£1,343,261£1,463,208
* For multi-authority YOTs, the totality of local authority contributions should be described as one figure.
** Any money from the police and crime commissioner that has been routed through a local crime reduction partnership should be included here.
*** It should be noted that the 'Other' category is for additional funding that the YOT can use for any general youth justice activities. 





Appendix d)
Strategic Manager (PT)Strategic Manager (FT)Operational Manager (PT)Operational Manager (FT)Practitioners
(PT)Practitioners
(FT)Administration (PT)Administration (FT)SessionalStudents/
traineesVolunteerTotalPermanent133150.6325.6Fixed-termOutsourcedTemporary44Vacant10.81.8Secondee Children's ServicesSecondee Probation0.50.5Secondee Police11Secondee Health (Substance misuse)11Secondee Health (Mental health)0.80.8Secondee Health (Physical health)Secondee Health (Speech/language)0.20.2Other/Unspecified Secondee HealthSecondee EducationSecondee ConnexionsSecondee OtherTOTAL134.5181.43434.9Disabled (self-classified)1


Managers StrategicManagers OperationalPractitionersAdministrativeSessionalStudentVolunteerTotalMFMFMFMFMFMFMFMFWhite British112816422361431White IrishGypsy or Irish TravellerOther WhiteWhite & Black CaribbeanWhite & Black AfricanWhite & AsianOther MixedIndianPakistaniBangladeshiChineseOther AsianCaribbeanAfricanOther BlackArabAny other ethnic groupNot KnownTOTAL11281642236
14
31Welsh Speakers1






Monmouthshire & Torfaen YOS Youth Justice Plan - Signatories

Name and DesignationSignature

Keith Rutherford
Acting Chief Officer
Social Care and Housing Directorate
Torfaen County Borough Council

Chair of Local Management Board






Date: 

Jane Rodgers 
Head of Children's Services
Monmouthshire County Council


Vice Chair of Local Management Board





Date: 


Youth Offending Service Manager
Monmouthshire County Council






Date: 12.08.2019


YJ Plan Cymru 2019- 21 - 2019/20 plan
Monmouthshire & Torfaen YOS


1 | Page


