




Youth Justice Strategic Plan
Newport Youth Offending Service
2019 - 2021
Including a review of 2018/19 










Contents
	
Introduction					Page 3

Structure and governance			Page 7
					
Resources and value for money		Page 9

Partnership arrangements			Page 14

Risks to future delivery against the youth	Page 17
Justice outcome measures

Performance highlights 2018/19		Page 18

How did we do - Performance			Page 20

Priorities for 2019/20				Page 45

Conclusion						Page 45

Appendices						Page 47							

Introduction
The Youth Justice Strategic plan for Newport 2019-2021 is produced in accordance with the duty imposed by the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, for each Local Authority to produce and implement an annual youth justice plan.  The purpose of the strategic plan is to:
? Set out how youth justice services in Newport are to be provided and funded
? State how Newport Youth Justice Team will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out.  
Newport
There is much to be optimistic about for the future of Newport, despite one of the harshest of economic times for Local Government.  Recent years has seen Newport schools produce some of the best results they have ever achieved, new schools are being built and others being redeveloped.   Business opportunities has been increased, and work in the city including beginning the transformation of the city centre with the Friars Walk development has been positively progressed.  Newport has worked proactively with partners in the Public Services Board to address issues of antisocial behaviour and crime across the city. 
However, it must be recognised that Newport still faces significant challenges, affecting the well-being and safety of local families. We have some of the wealthiest and poorest neighbourhoods in Wales, in some cases just a walking distance apart. Geographical patterns of poverty are also reflected in health inequalities and huge differences in healthy life expectancy across the city. We know that unemployment, low incomes, poor skill levels, crime, and anti-social behaviour disproportionately affect certain neighbourhoods. While areas of poverty and deprivation exist across the city, Newport council and its partners are working with local communities to understand the differing issues and identifying priorities. 
There is a focus on meeting the needs of those communities and families most in need and those most disadvantaged and at risk.  The number of children living in low-income families is higher than the national average and Newport has historically had a higher rate of criminal offences than is seen in the rest of Wales. This is true in relation to children who offend as well as adult offenders. The number of children on the Child Protection Register has also increased since 2017/18, however this is in line with all Welsh Authorities and not unique to Newport. 
Newport is a multi-cultural city with its own unique identity, where traditional industries sit alongside new electronics and financial service sectors. Standing at the gateway between England and Wales, Newport covers a geographical area of just over 73.5 square miles and is a vibrant, forward-thinking city steeped in a rich industrial heritage, dating from the nineteenth century when its important strategic location was first recognised.
Newport consists of 20 designated ward areas and 14 community Councils.  The age structure of the population in Newport differs to the Wales average with a higher percentage of people under the age of 16 and a lower percentage of over the age of 65. The percentage of the population aged 0 - 15 years over a five-year period between 2011 and 2015 remained relatively constant and in 2015 was estimated at 20.1%. This was above the Wales average, which was estimated at 17.9%.
The population of Newport in 2019 is estimated to be 148,776, based on an annual growth of approximately 260 individuals. This indicates the population in Newport over the period 2014 to 2039, is expected to increase by 7.9% to 158,492.   It should be noted that within these forecasts, the number of 0-25 year olds is predicted to increase.  This forecast contradicts the national prediction that the population within this age group will decrease.
Census data from 2011 tells us the population of Newport was made up of 89.9% people from a white background and 10.1% people from a non-white background.   Newport has the second largest ethnic population in Wales, with approximately 120 different languages being spoken in communities across the City.  
The Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015, in addition to financial challenges, will require Newport to think differently in the future, and consider how we can work in partnership with other organisations, in a joined up way, to prevent future problems. A requirement of this new Act, places a statutory duty for local authority areas to prepare a local Well-being Plan, setting out the Public Services Board priorities and actions for the next 5 years.   The plan focusses on five crosscutting interventions to improve well-being in the city and maximise the PSB's contribution to the Well-being Goals for Wales. The work of the Youth Justice Service directly contributes to several of these overarching objectives within the plan, specifically 'Strong Resilient Communities'.
Youth Justice Service - Newport
Whilst the Youth Justice Service will maintain its delivery against statutory functions, it needs to consider its inclusion in this wider partnership approach in order to grow the preventative offer to children who may be on the cusp of accessing the service.  A robust application and culture of child first/child friendly approaches must be embedded into future services development beyond those in the youth justice sector, if we are to truly offer children opportunities to disengage from risky lifestyles and have a chance to rehabilitate into happier safer and fulfilled individuals.      
Newport Youth Justice Service continues to work with their statutory aim of preventing and reducing offending by children.  Partnership working remains a critical feature of the service, with involvement /active participation and membership of a range of strategic and operational boards and working groups being an essential feature of the work for managers and practitioners. 
The Management Board, responsible for the governance and scrutiny of the Youth Justice Service has continued to play a key role in supporting and directing the service over the past year.  This has been despite a challenging year (18/19) for the service and Board overall, with the absence of some key staff personnel including the long-term absence of the previous Service Manager due to ill health.  A number of additional changes in staffing and roles had an impact on the stability and infrastructure supporting the team and Board.  The service saw the loss of some sessional workers for a variety of reasons, and the recruitment of volunteers had stalled somewhat due to capacity issues.  Additionally, the loss of the Business Support Manager whom had taken much of a lead on the strategic plans in the absence of the Service Manager also affected many aspects of the previous plan and recommendations from the Peer Review being taken forward.  Links with the Youth Service stalled and the presence of a Youth Worker within the team had been lost due to vacancies/capacity issues. 
Despite the challenges, performance in statutory work has not been affected, with some positive outcomes from courts including a successful double appeal that saw the sentences for two young people reduced from DTO to Community YROs.  Disappointingly, the development of the earlier intervention/prevention pathways had not been significantly progressed and this has been identified as a priority area for the coming year.  
Positively, nationally and locally the number of young people coming into the youth justice system continues to fall, with increasing numbers of young people being diverted through earlier intervention and prevention approaches.  This is certainly the case in Newport, with the number of First Time Entrants at an all-time low of just 40 young people in 18/19, and the increased offer of Community Resolutions diverting young people away and out of the system.  This has risen by 11 in 2018/19, with 90 CRs given to young people in this year. Significantly, 49.4% of our work has been with those young people who are subject to a pre-court intervention (CR, YC, YCC), with 28 young people subject to a court order.  Notably, the previous year 17/18 saw more young people subject to court orders than out of court disposals in Newport. This is positive indication of the enhanced 'child first' approaches being taken to supporting young people in Newport.  More understanding and recognition of trauma and adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) affecting young people is increasingly evident in interventions and court outcomes.
2018/19 saw one young person on remand, whilst another young person was subject to a Bail Support Programme.  We also had 1 preventative intervention and 12 Voluntary Support Programmes, as part of an exit strategy for the young person.  
Performance
Performance in education, training and employment (ETE) has continued to remain strong, evidencing an increase in the number of hours attending education for school-aged children, with the involvement of a JYS worker.  2018/19 saw this trend continue raising from an average of 12 to 15.5 hours per week.  Similar improvement was seen with the 16plus cohort of young people, improving from an average of 10.9 to 14 hours per week.  
The Substance Misuse work was affected for a period with the loss of the practitioner, and subsequent appointment of a new worker. Despite the disruption, performance in this area saw no change, with 96% of young people referred for a substance misuse assessment receiving this in agreed timescales.  Positively we saw performance improve with those young people receiving treatment from the previous year - increasing from 92% to 95.7%.  The existing SLA is due to be renewed in the coming year, and dates have been set for this to take place.      
The figures for mental health assessments carried out within agreed timescales in 2018/19 saw the percentage drop from 100% in the previous year to 92.3%.  It is noted however, this decline in performance represents just one young person.   
The most common offences committed by young people in Newport within the pre-court cohort were:
? Violence against the person
? Criminal damage
? Drug offences
? Public Order offences
? Handling stolen goods 

The most common offences committed by young people who were sentenced in court during 18/19 were:

? Violence against the person
? Motoring offences
? Fraud
? Robbery
? Drug offences
? Theft

A self- commissioned Peer Review was undertaken by the YJB in partnership with the sector led Improvement Governance Group in the summer of 18/19.  Trained peers within Youth Justice carried out the voluntary review, designed to be an opportunity for the team and local partners to gain a fresh perspective from peers. The review represented a snapshot of the workings of the Youth Justice Team in Newport, and all points and issues identified in the report were verified and triangulated as far as possible, ensuring that the process was as useful as possible to the Youth Justice Partnership.  
The report highlighted a number of areas for consideration for improvement, however also encouraged all involved with the Youth Justice Partnership in Newport to celebrate their achievements, with some examples of which were noted and reported back on, to build upon what they do well going forward. (Appendix 1)
The Management Board both accepted and adopted the main findings of the Peer Review specifically in relation to the structure of the Board.  Undertaking a consultation workshop in October 2018 with all its members to consider how to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Board, the consensus was to streamline both membership and levels of paperwork and documentation.  This was believed to assist the Board with having greater clarity on its responsibility to lead strategically on youth justice matters affecting Newport.    
Following the retirement of the existing Service Manager and appointment of a new individual into this role, the board was officially relaunched with a new membership and strategic focus in April 2019.  This was the first time the board had reconvened for some time, with the agenda information including the new Inspection Framework, National Standards and availability of Inspection reports already published.  The introduction of these documents to board members was timely to allow discussion and share thoughts, particularly on the scrutiny of the board itself within the new framework.  It is recognised the board has work to do in order to lead the Newport service with a renewed strategic approach, in addition to working within the new inspection framework.   
Safeguarding      
The Youth Justice Service takes its responsibilities for safeguarding young people seriously. Newport sits within a clear framework that has oversight for the Gwent Regional Strategic Safeguarding Structure, and is supported by the Gwent Strategic Safeguarding Plan 19-20.  As a shared Gwent responsibility, a Service Manager sits of the Safeguarding Board representing all three Gwent Youth Justice Services.
Newport Youth Justice Service has been instrumental in raising concerns and issues for young people involved with child criminal exploitation (CCE) and serious organised crime (SOC).  Accessing support from St Giles Trust to deliver targeted 1-1 interventions is actively promoted, and the service is actively contributing to the development of a Newport multi agency Child Criminal Exploitation Strategy, aimed at bringing some co-ordinated and consistent approaches to how services support these young people.  

Structure and Governance
After much activity and discussion in previous years considering the viability of a Gwent wide Youth Justice Service, as reported last year this proposal has now been firmly laid to rest for the time being.  Therefore, Newport Youth Justice Service remains one of three services in Gwent covering five unitary authorities.  Combined, the three services work strategically across Gwent to deliver effective and positive experiences of working with the Youth Justice teams for the young people accessing them.  All three Youth Justice Services report directly to their own management board.  In Newport, the service is sited within Childrens' Services, with the Service Manager directly managed and supervised by the Head of Childrens Services.  The Service Manager operates within a wider children's services management team, with responsibilities for other work streams across the directorate, including managing the Prevention Service.  
Following publication of the Peer Review Report, the Board was subsequently restructured and renamed Strategic Partnership Board to better reflect its renewed functions.  With a clearer focus on the need to have a strategic lead and oversight for the Youth Justice Service in Newport, and critically be better able to respond to emerging issues with a clear and coherent approach, the name change also indicates a greater emphasis on the partnership arrangements and their responsibilities.  
(Appendix 2) provides an overview of board attendance in 2018/19, just prior to the restructure took place.  As a result of these changes, the Board intends to have increased time allocated to discussing existing and emerging priorities for Newport, and more clearly steer the work of the Newport team from a strategic assessment of local needs.  This has been viewed and accepted as largely lacking in the previous board functions.  
Positively, despite the many challenges faced by the team due to staffing issues and capacity, they successfully progressed with a number of areas of work detailed in the 18/19 plan that was approved by the Management Board in the summer of 2018.   It should be noted that many of the actions to be progressed were the responsibilities of staff who were either unavailable or had left the service.  Where appropriate, these will be picked up for the coming year priorities. (Appendix 3) 
The new Service Manager is committed to ensuring a robust performance framework is established within the team, providing operational and performance outcome updates to the Board members throughout the year.  It is expected the newly structured Board will be able to utilise its senior responsibilities and decision-making capacity to ensure high quality performance is delivered by Newport Youth Justice Service, seek resolutions to any blocks and identify any gaps in local provision.  The Board will actively promote a child first message and approach within its strategic approach, providing alternatives resolutions to that of criminalising young people where possible.
The service in Newport has a very experienced Information Officer whose role is dedicated to providing timely submission of data and monitoring reports, amongst other key areas of work.  It is intended that a summary of performance will be made available to the board at each meeting to ensure awareness, oversight and challenge where necessary.  This lead role will also assist the board in completion of any required audits.     

Resources and Value for Money
YJB Grant
The purpose of the YJB grant is to develop good practice with a view to achieving the following outcomes:
* Reduction in first time entrants.
* Reduction in youth re-offending.
* Reduction in the use of youth custody.
* Effective public protection.
* Effective safeguarding.
* Access to devolved services for young people in the youth justice system in line with joint YJB/Welsh Government outcome measures.

These outcomes are primarily achieved through the staffing resource, which is the predominant use of financial and in kind resources.  Effective and efficient application of these resources is critical to enable us to deliver the required outcomes.  As mentioned above, posts have changed within the service whilst managing the ongoing budget pressures. Although not a huge amount of change, it has to be recognised that ongoing staffing costs, including pension and National Insurance contributions have all been increasing.  With overall grant allocations not increasing in line, we are seeing the shortfall again being picked up by the Local Authority core budget.  The staffing structure has in the main remained stable over the course of 2018/19, and is expected to remain so for the foreseeable future, based on service demand and budget availability.  It is noted that at the current time one Diversionary Officer has been on long-term sickness leave, contributing somewhat to the pressures and capacity to take forward a clearer more defined role for the Diversionary Officer role within the team.  The Probation case manager has been absent for a period in the quarter 4 due to injury, and our police officer left to commence agreed leave.     

Promoting Positive Engagement with Young People (formerly Youth Crime Prevention Fund)
£12K has been made available to continue funding the restorative officer for children who are looked after.  NCC continues to contribute additional funds to make this a full time post, in recognition of the worth of this post. There remains a recognition that this resource should be made more widely available to those young people who may be placed out of county.  Highlighted in the previous Youth Justice Report from Newport 2017-19, and in support of the Lord Laming report (In Care and Out of Trouble) there remains work to be done in this particular area.  
The majority of this funding stream does not directly come to the Youth Justice Service.  In Newport, current arrangements means this funding stream is targeted at antisocial behaviour (ASB) and prevention work, including up to October 2018, supporting the facilitation of Restorative Justice Disposals (RJDs).  The Prevention service and Youth Service submit bi-annual performance information to the Welsh Government to evidence how the funding is used and outcomes achieved.
There has been previous attempts to improve joint working and pathways between the Prevention service and Youth Justice Service, including joint performance meetings, developing a shared resource (including other partners) of a Saturday morning workshop, sharing the youth worker provision and increased physical presence of one of the managers of the Prevention service at the Youth Justice Team.  Over the course of the last year, these arrangements have stalled somewhat for a variety of reasons, including the absence of a Service Manager, staff sickness and/or vacancies and loss of a clear vision and lead on the purpose of the partnership.  With the new Service Manager directly responsible for both services, it is anticipated this area of work will be revisited and prioritised in the coming year.  Developing the preventative offer from Newport Youth Justice Service is considered one of the priority areas for 2019/20.  

Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) funding
This funding part funds the Restorative Justice Lead Worker and Substance Misuse Worker..  Bi-annual performance information is submitted to the PCC to evidence how the funding is used and outcomes achieved.

Partner funding
The National Probation Service (NPS) having made a 50% cut to funding in 2016/17, contributed 5K in 2018/19. Whilst staffing resource continues to be seconded to Youth Justice Services in Gwent, Newport Youth Justice Team saw a further 50% reduction of this resource in October 2018 when the full time seconded caseworker was reduced to part time in Newport.  
No other agency reduced their funding in 2018/19, and to date has not indicated an intention to do so in 2019/20. NCC has committed to funding any overspend in 2019/20 which may result from additional provision for our young people.  An example of this being short-term education provision for a young person over the summer holiday period.  Having missed many years of formal education, is now on a more stable path with a plan to re-enter education/volunteering and then employment.  Whilst acknowledging the limitations of how formal education is offered to all young people, it is a welcome decision from the board to support this as we strive to provide the right support at the right time to enable our young people to improve their situations and leave the world of offending and/or anti-social behaviour behind.  
Gwent Police and Aneurin Bevan University Health Board (ABUHB) each continue to second a full time officer and hence contribute resources in kind.
The tables below detail the financial contributions to the Youth Justice Service for 2018/19 and projected budget for 2019/20.
 Partner contribution to the Youth Justice Service Newport - pooled budget 2018/19
AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Local authority*457,651
69,185
116,621
643,457
Police Service51,510
51,510
National Probation Service5,000
5,000
Health Service
19,000
54,223
73,223Police and crime commissioner**29,798
29,798
Welsh Government12,000
12,000
YJB Youth Justice Grant (YRO Unpaid Work Order is included in this grant)304,362
304,362
Total879,321
123,408
116,621
1,119,350

In 2018/19 the YOS budget was underspent.  This was primarily due to lower level of spend on sessional fees in the year and with the absence of key staff, progress in service developments were delayed. It is noted that the costs for the agency staff in 2018/19 were met by NCC and not sourced from the YOS budget.
 Partner contribution to the Youth Justice Service Newport - pooled budget 2019/20
AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Local authority*642,810
71,972
69,782
784,564
Police Service51,510
56,223
107,733
National Probation Service5,000
26,824
31,824
Health Service19,000
54,223
73,223
Police and crime commissioner**30,000

30,000
Welsh Government12,000
12,000
YJB Youth Justice Grant (YRO Unpaid Work Order is included in this grant)
301,496
301,496
Total1,061,816

209,242
69,782
1,340,840
The YJB grant and financial resources are primarily used to resource the staffing of the Youth Justice Team, which to date consists of:
? 1 service manager (shared with Prevention Service)
? 2 team managers
? 2 senior practitioners 
? 5 social workers
? 1 probation officer 
? 1 clinical nurse specialist
? 1 substance misuse worker
? 1 education worker (80% full time equivalent)
? 1 police officer
? 1 information officer
? 6 diversion officers
? 1 lead restorative justice officer (victim worker)
? 1 restorative officer for Looked After Children
? 1 reparation officer
? 1 Resettlement officer
? 40% of a speech and language therapist
? 2 FTE business support officers
Breakdown of staffing, agency, gender and ethnicity.  (Appendix 4)
There continued to be a reduction of sessional staff and volunteers in the last year to support the service. Despite attempting to recruit and train on several occasions in previous years, the number of volunteers and sessional workers remains low. Ongoing staffing absence saw the ability to maintain a robust volunteer and sessional recruitment/training programme challenging.  This is an area identified as a priority as we head into 19/20, recognising the value and additional capacity that this resource can bring to the service and the children we support. 
Further staffing changes included the retirement of a long-standing police officer with the team, and after a short period without this resource, the team welcomed the arrival of a new officer before Christmas 2018.
 A number of back fill arrangements were put in place, with the Restorative Justice Lead Officer securing a secondment with Gwent Police to further develop the work of Restorative Justice and Victim focus work.  This meant that existing staff within the team had an opportunity to experience and develop skills in a different role whilst remaining with the team.  A positive and welcome opportunity.  This work was then unfortunately hampered by the long-term absence of the acting up Restorative Lead Officer due to ill health.    
With the departure of two senior Business Support staff members, the front of house has in the latter part of 2018/19 experienced severe pressures on the remaining staff, requiring a drawing on the whole team to support front door functions.  
The new Service Manager whilst inheriting a number of plans and staffing challenges, largely due to ill health, has identified a number of priorities that need to be progressed in order the team and service can be further developed and improved.  These will be reflected in the priorities for the service in 2019/20.       

Partnership Arrangements
The three Youth Justice Services in Gwent collaborate in relation to attendance at a number of different partnerships. Through 2018/19, regular Team Manager and Service Manager meetings took place, facilitating information exchange and networking opportunities.
? Public Services Board (PSB): The YJS works closely with all partners through the PSB, which includes Gwent Police, PCC, South Wales Fire and Rescue Service and health. 

? Court Services: There is a jointly agreed Service Level Agreement with the Court, and attendance at a multi-agency Magistrates' Court User Group.  The Court Service Level Agreement has recently been reviewed and an updated agreement is currently being drawn together.  Regular meetings also take place between the Youth Magistrates' Panel Chair and Deputy Panel Chair and some of the Gwent Youth Offending Service Managers to discuss court issues.  

? Risk Management/MAPPA arrangements: Representation from the Gwent wide YJS is made on the MAPPA Strategic Management Board, CJS Strategy Group, and the CJS Strategy Board where issues relating to the management of the criminal justice system in Gwent are discussed.  

? South East Wales Safeguarding Children Board (SEWSCB): One of the YJS Service Managers for Gwent represents youth justice on the SEWSCB.  A team manager from Newport YJS sits on the Case Review and Practice Development Sub-group and the local Learning and Review sub-group. 

? Area Planning Board (APB): The Newport YJS Service Manager represents Gwent YJSs on the APB for substance misuse.

? The Monmouthshire and Torfaen YJS Service Manager represents Gwent YJS on the Gwent Integrated Offender Management (IOM) Board. A Newport team manager continues to sit on the IOM steering group.
? All three YJS Service Managers attend the monthly Gwent monitoring and scrutiny panel, which was set up in March 2017 to monitor compliance with the Gwent protocol for the transfer of young people to local authority care from police custody. 

? All three YJS Service Managers also attend the quarterly Gwent out of court disposal (OOCD) scrutiny panel, which reviews decision making in relation to OOCDs.

? Newport YJS is leading with key partners on developing a Newport Strategy for responding to Child Criminal exploitation, in recognition that there is a cohort of young people where traditional safeguarding and child protection responses are not effective.  

? Newport YJS is fully committed to and participating in developing future services within a contextual safeguarding framework.  These developments are in response to the growing awareness of serious youth violence, serious organised crime and exploitation in its many forms of young people.       
In addition, a number of protocols, service level agreements and multi-agency meetings are in place to support operational practice and delivery, which includes:
? A service level agreement (SLA) with Careers Wales. There is also a Memorandum of Understanding between YJS Managers' Cymru and Careers Wales.   A careers adviser attends the YJS on a weekly basis and regular liaison takes place with the YJS staff. 

? A working protocol between Social Services and housing has been in place for some time.  A Gwent SLA with Health has been reviewed and approved in 18/19. An agreement between Social Services, Housing and YJS exists to secure accommodation for those young people exiting from custody.

? A working protocol between Newport YJS and the Learning Provider Network remains in place.  This is to ensure information is shared on risk with improved communication between the YJS and post-16 ETE providers, ensuring greater access to ETE opportunities for young people who offend, or on the cusp of entering the youth justice system.  

? A Gwent protocol for the reduction of the prosecution of Looked After Children is in place and is regularly used within the youth court. 

? A practitioner/YJS police officer and manager from the Prevention service sit on the Integrated Offender Management (IOM) group and the ASB theme aim group. A YJS practitioner sits on the localised ASB groups.

? The YJS Service Manager from Blaenau Gwent/Caerphilly YJS represents the three YJS at the Safer Gwent forum.  
? The ETE worker sits on the board for the Bridge Achievement Centre (BAC), which provides education, training or employment (ETE) to some of the more challenging young people many of whom are known to the YJS and/or Prevention services.

? The ETE workers also sits on the local authority's Managed Moves panel which meets weekly to discuss young people at risk of exclusion/or who have complex behavioural needs. The YJS has its own agenda item in this panel.

? The YJS ETE worker sits on both the 16-18 'not in education nor employment' (NEET) practitioner group and the pre 16 NEET sub-groups where young people are tracked as part of the wider Young Peoples Engagement Framework (YPEF) strategy and is able to raise cases and refer onto other agencies for additional support. 

? The YJS management team meet on a quarterly basis with other team managers within NCC's children's services. They also attend various case conferences and meetings as needed to support improved outcomes for young people.

? The Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS) attends and contributes to discussion in relation to high risk cases at the virtual forensic team meeting (monthly). 

? The service attends and participates in a bi-annual children's services conference. 

? Practitioner and team manage representation on Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE) and multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) groups.  

? The multi-agency resettlement and reintegration panel continues to be held on a monthly basis, and facilitates the development of appropriate support through custody and once released.

? Youth to Adult transition arrangements - continues through existing channels (IOM) and transfer through YJS Probation Officer who will complete OASYS assessments prior to transfer, and support the transfer process.

? Speech and Language Therapist:  this role continues to bring added benefits to the service, with much earlier identification of young people who could benefit from a therapist to improve their communication skills.  A work plan for the coming year has been reviewed at the end of 18/19, approved by all JYS in Gwent.  

? Representation by Newport YJS at Hwb Doeth events and practitioner groups remains in place. 
These local and regional arrangements all exist to advocate for the young people in youth justice services, and secure improvements against relevant national youth justice outcomes.  These partnerships ensure opportunities for YJ staff to promote a 'child first offender second' message, advocating that where possible and appropriate, young people are offered support and rehabilitation to reduce their involvement with the youth justice world.        

Risks to future delivery against the Youth Justice outcome measures
Funding
Continued uncertainty over what the funding commitments will be, remains the constant risk to the service in Newport.  This makes longer-term business planning more challenging and has an impact on developing the right projects within a sustainable framework.   The service continues to maximise opportunities to develop collaborations which are mutually beneficial, and to access additional funding streams where available. 
Political climate
The YJS, as with many other services, face uncertainty whenever elections take place, and the concern of a reduced priority for youth justice matters locally and nationally will continue to exist.  
Lack of contingency for partner roles
The team has experienced challenges in the last year, with partner agencies struggling with their own pressures and demands.  The service experienced 2 periods of no police officer presence due to the retirement of one, and adoption leave of another.  Counterparts in other YJS in Gwent continue to offer what support they can, and whilst welcomed, is simply not able to replicate the benefits and value of having an officer based within the team on a daily basis. 
The service experienced a reduced capacity from the clinical nurse specialist, who was also for a period of the year covering aspects of his manager's role, who had been seconded elsewhere.  Going forward into 2019/20, a newly recruited CNS will hopefully provide the team with the full benefits of the role on a day-to-day basis, responding timely and appropriately to those young people identified as experiencing mental health issues.  
The Gwent substance misuse service N-Gage, has committed to providing cover during the absence of their worker.  Whilst this can be managed with the planned absence of a worker, managing and responding to ill health is more challenging to plan for.  
A planned restructure of the team includes building in some resilience within the Business Support Team to support the Information Officer in the critical aspects of his work.  This is in recognition that this is a critical post responsible for managing, interrogating and producing performance reports as per terms and conditions of grant funding.   
Summary Of Achievements in 2018/19
Despite a particularly challenging year with staffing issues for a variety of reasons, the team should feel very proud of themselves in what they have achieved.  The team demonstrated resilience and commitment to the children of Newport, with a number of areas seeing progress and positive outcomes: 

? Newport saw less children in custody. This is the lowest number of children sentenced to custody the team has ever had.  No child from Newport has been sentenced to custody since December 2018. 

? Strong collaborations between our Speech and Language and Education Practitioner meant that a number of children have been identified with severe global Speech and Language Communication Needs (SLCN).  Children with an IQ less than 70 (cut off point in determining a learning Disability) have also been identified, and the YJS workers have been instrumental in advising Education and Health on appropriate support provision.  Significantly, feedback from family members have said 'it's the first time they've felt listened to and valued'.

? This work has also seen a link up with our colleagues in the police to add 'markers' against identified children.  This sharing of information is seen as an example of good practice; child focussed and supports police officers to understand some children will need additional or different support should they come to their attention.

? Internal processes and systems are continually being reviewed and adapted to provide a cohesive and multi-disciplinary approach to supporting children accessing the service. Ensuring all communication is child focussed and easy to use has been an area of improvement this last year, ranging from the child participation toolkit to gain their views, and resources being made available to the team to ensure staff communicate with all  children in a way they can understand.  This enhances the quality of intervention and allows the child to feel more empowered throughout the dialogue.   

? Increased use of exit strategies and voluntary interventions. 
? Two of our Diversionary Officers led on producing a short film with talented children from Newport entitled 'Anti-Social Bob'.  Recorded on location around the City of Newport, the film is aimed at tackling the growing issues surrounding anti-social behaviour.  Working collaboratively with school police liaison officers and South Wales Fire Service, the team visited local primary schools in Newport to deliver the film to assemblies to highlight how anti-social behaviour affects everyone.  At the start of this year 2019/20, the film was presented at the Senedd Building in Cardiff, sponsored by the Assembly Member for Newport West - Jayne Bryant.

? Positive advocacy and challenge around custodial placements when it was felt a YP was inappropriately placed.    

? One of our Restorative Justice Officers was recognised as a 'champion' of Newport Values by the Chief Executive for Newport City Council.  This annual recognition is awarded to those employees that go beyond their job role, going that extra mile for the service and young people of Newport.

? A combined effort from several staff members saw a young person sentenced to a DTO last October for violent offences, including against family members, achieve a fabulous outcome for both him and his family.  With a rather bleak outlook at the start of his sentence, and a real possibility of going into unsuitable accommodation post his release, the team worked intensively with the whole family and YP whilst he was in custody.  As a result, relationships improved to the point the YP was able to return home.  The team had facilitated opportunities for the YP to restart a dialogue with his father, and family mediation work was successfully carried out.  The preparatory and ongoing work saw the situation improve hugely, with positive voluntary involvement continuing following the end of the statutory order.  

? Improvement towards working in a more trauma informed way.  This has been testament to the commitment of staff to engage in relationship based work and applying this understanding to practice when working with young people.  The team have seen some positive outcomes due to focussing on building relationships within a trauma informed framework, including a young person's successful transition to independent living.

? Newport's ability to advocate a strong 'Child First, Offender Second' message saw the term used by the Appeal Court Judge on the successful double appeal in February 19. The Trauma Informed Pyramid of Need/Trauma Recovery Model were attached to both PSRs and saw positive outcomes as a result. Sentences reduces from DTO to YRO. 

? Improved diversion of young people via the highly positive new Bureau process.  

? Improved quality of assessment / Asset+ embedded.

? First positive NRM decision for UK national. 

? Resettlement support to ensure contact was maintained when a young person was placed out of area in Hillside and Rainsbrook.

? Continued presence and engagement with young people and the community in one of the more challenging neighbourhoods in Newport. 

? Out of Court Disposal Protocol reviewed and updated. (Appendix 5)



How did we Do 2018/19 - Performance
As reported earlier in the report, nationally, we continue to see the number of children coming into the youth justice system falling.  Newport is maintaining this trend with 2018/19 seeing this figure almost halved in the last financial year. 
? 2017/18 	76
? 2018/19 	40

The strengthened focus on the 'child first' principle from within the world of criminal justice has seen a significant reduction in new First Time Entrants in Newport.  The last couple of years has seen an increase in children being diverted from the criminal justice system through prevention and early intervention and a more active offer of a Community Resolution (CR) in place instead.  The team and Board welcome this increased child focussed approach, enabling professionals and volunteers to take a meaningful trauma informed approach to their work, understanding and contributing the experiences our children have lived through, to their presenting behaviours.  Recognising that these young people will in large, respond more positively to support, understanding and positive opportunities than direct punishment and negative labelling as an 'offender'.        
In line with the 'child first' approach, changes were made across Gwent to implement the new Gwent Bureau Protocol, and this was again reviewed earlier this year (Appendix 5).    
With less referral orders coming through, and increased Community Resolution Disposals (CRs) being given, which are not being classed as a substantive outcome (not classed as a First Time Entrant), Newport saw the numbers of First Time Entrants decrease significantly in 2018/19.
Caseloads
Breakdown of all cases open to YJS as at 29.03.2019
Total17 plus17 plus 
6 monthsPre CourtCourt 
OrdersBail
SupportRemandPreventative
InterventionsVoluntary Interventions853214422811112
CLACSEMAPPAIOMISS Cases
(incl ISS Bail)Intensive CasesHigh / V High ROSH High/V High S&W High / V High 
Both9814113274Key: 
ROSH - Risk of harm to self and others 
S&W - Safety and Wellbeing 
Both - ROSH and S&W


Comparisons to 29.03.2018
? Caseload numbers have increased by 10 young people, compared to the end of the previous year.
? The number of children looked after (CLA) has decreased significantly throughout the year, with just 9 children open to YJS at the end of 18/19. 
? 43.8% of 17+ cases open are aged 17 years, 6 months or older. This has remained a stable figure with no change from March 2018.
? The number of young people subject to IOM has increased to 4.
? The number of cases with CSE concerns this quarter has increased slightly.
? 49.4% of our work is with those young people who are subject to a pre-court intervention (CR, YC, YCC).  28 young people subject to a court order.  1 young person is on remand, whilst another young person is subject to a Bail Support Programme.  At the end of 2018/19 we had 1 Preventative Intervention case and 12 Voluntary Support Programmes, as part of an exit strategy for the young person.  This has changed significantly from the previous year when we saw more young people subject to court orders than out of court disposals.

First Time Entrants (FTE)

In 18/19 we saw 40 young people became a FTE - which has decreased by 51% compared to the previous year.  This means Newport exceeded their performance target in this measure by 50%.   A large contributing factor for the reduction in this area is due to the introduction of the new Gwent Bureau Protocol introduced in October 2018.  Children can now be eligible for a Community Resolution Disposal, a diversionary programme, keeping children away from the criminal justice system, for up to 3 times before they are issued with an out of court disposal such as a Youth Caution, or are sentenced at court to a community or custodial order.  This welcome reduction reinforces the greater emphasis now on treating children as children first, offering support and opportunities to them more intensively before entering the more formal youth justice world.
40% (16) of the FTE's came through the court system, with the majority of those receiving a Referral Order or with additions, known locally as an Intensive Referral Order.  A further 24 young people came through after receiving a Youth Caution/Conditional Caution at the Bureau panel.




BAME (Black and Minority Ethnic) - First Time Entrants
The vast majority of our FTE's in 18/19 continued to be male with only 8 female FTEs.  Positively, the number of females becoming a FTE has reduced by over 50% in the year.  There is no change in the age group coming through.  Similar to last year, we are still seeing 12 - 17 year olds becoming the first time entrant's cohort.  The peak age for males continues to be aged 15 or 16yrs whilst this year, we have seen the peak age for females being 14 or 15yrs.  The vast majority of FTEs are of white ethnic origin, with only 5 young people of black and minority ethnic origin becoming a first time entrant to the criminal justice system in Newport.  





Performance - Key Indicators
IndicatorData - 2017/18Data - 2018/19Trend (Comparison to 2017/18)CommentsNumber of Pre Court Allocations CRs only. Formerly RJD's until October 2018)

Target: >30% of new workload (NCC)
83 RJDs of 230 new referrals (33.3%) NB March 2019
94 CRs of 181 new referrals (51.9%) NB April 2018 - March 2019
Significant increase in the numbers of Community Resolutions issued.
New Bureau protocol  implemented across Gwent, in October 2018 giving young people the opportunity to receive up to three Community Resolution Disposals - a diversion away from the criminal justice system.
First Time Entrant (FTE)

Target: < 80 (NCC)


76 CYPs


40 CYP
Performance Improved
Less referral orders and the new Gwent Bureau Protocol have both contributed to this positive outcome.    Community Resolution Disposals are not classed as a substantive outcome.  They are not recorded on PNC and therefore they are not classed as a First Time EntrantCustody 
Young People sentenced to custody

Target: <25 (NCC)


9 YP sentenced to DTO


4 YP sentenced to DTO


Continued strong performance

Milestone reduction in numbers of young people being sentenced to custodyRe-offending 
Pre Court 

YP given a RJD, YC/YCC in previous financial year, tracked for 12 Months)


Target: <30%  (NCC)




Re-offending Post Court 

Target: <50% (NCC)


34 out of 164 reoffended 
20.7%

(Local cohort)










35 out of 87 reoffended
40.2%

(Local cohort)


25 out of 118 
re-offended
21.2%

(Local cohort)










25 out of 64 reoffended
39.1%

(Local cohort)
Performance Declined













Improved 
Performance
Despite less young people re-offending this year, the cohort has decreased by 46, which has pushed the re-offending rate up









The number of young people re-offending, who were subject to statutory court orders 12 months prior, has gone down by 10.
ETE
(Closed statutory orders only)

School age: 
25hrs (YJB)
15 hrs (NCC)

Post 16
16 hrs (YJB)
10 hrs (NCC)



Based on 18 YP
Ave 11.3 hrs to 14.4 hrs 


Based on 2 YP
Ave 10.5 hrs to 11.4 hrs




Based on 11 YP
Ave 12 hrs to 15.5 hrs 


Based on 34 YP Ave 10.9 hrs to 14 hrs 




Performance Improved




Performance ImprovedAccommodation
(Closed statutory orders only)

Target: >80% (YJB)
              >85% (NCC)
89.7%
 (In suitable accommodation) 
61 out of 68 YP
84.9% 
(In suitable accommodation) 45 out of 53 YP
Performance declined Performance has declined due to reporting on less numbers of young people whose statutory court order came to an end in 18/19Substance Misuse
(Closed statutory orders only)

Target: >80% (YJB)


23 YP requiring assessment
22 within timescales
96% 


14 YP requiring treatment
13 within timescales 
92%
25 YP requiring assessment
24 within timescales
96%


23 YP requiring treatment
22 within  timescales
 95.7%
No change in Performance



Improved PerformanceMental Health
(Closed statutory orders only)

Target: >80% (YJB)

NB; different timescales for MH & SM

14 YP referred for assessment 14 within timescales
100%
13 YP referred for assessment 12 within timescales 
92.3%
Performance Declined

Reduced CNS Capacity due to covering aspects of another role.
Prevention - Relate to Parenting interventions and emotional regulation interventions with young people aged 10 - 17yrs in 18/19
There is an strong indiction that the YJS is not utlising the support of the Prevention service, either as an exit strategy or as part of joint working. This year the YJS contributed to less than 1.5% of the Prevention caseload (excluding RJDs case managed during Q1 and Q2 of this financial year).  Whilst this is disappointing, the staffing challenges highlighted above may have contributed to this pathway not being progessed more significantly. 
Prevention Caseload 2018/19
InterventionNumberNumber of referrals by YJS% YJS Referrals Parenting38861.55%Emotional Regulation8511.18%Wishes & Feelings14610.68%

Pre-Court - relate to Pre Court Interventions Commenced in 2018/19
94 Community Resolution Disposals (known as Restorative Justice Disposals until October 2018) were allocated this year -up by 11  compared to last year, when we had 83.  This increase can be directly linked to the new Gwent Bureau that was implemented in October 2018.  Gravity scores of offences are no longer taken into account when children are referred for Community Resolutions (CR's).  Additionaly, a young person may be eligible for up to three CR's before they are either charged to court or referred to the Newport Bureau Clinic, where they may receive other out of court disposals, such as a Youth Caution or Youth Conditional Caution.  Whilst young people now have a greater opportunity to be diverted away from the criminal justice system, they will still be referred to the YJS via the offer of a Community Resolution.  Case responsibility sits with the YJS for any CR's that are issued by Gwent Police.
The peak age for boys coming through for a CR this year was 17yrs, whilst for girls those aged between 14 - 17yrs.  Similar to last year, drugs offences and criminal damage offences continue to be the most common committed in 18/19.  The only difference we have seen is offences of theft and handling were more common than they are now. A total of 116 offences were comitted this year, with 16 young people responsible for comitting more than one offence.







Number of RJD/CR's Allocated 2018/19





Offences Committed - RJD/CR's 2018/19




BAME (Black and Minority Ethnic) - Pre-Court

The vast majority of young people working with the JYS in Newport are of white ethnic origin, with just 13 young people being of black and other minority ethnic origin.  Young people of white ethnic origin are more likely to be committing assault offences and being violent against the person. 
In contrast, young people of non- white ethnic backgrounds are more likely to commit criminal damage and public order offences. 2018/2019 did see one group of non-white origin males, all co-defendants and responsible for a non-domestic burglary incident at the City Centre.



       BAME - Offences committed by ethnicity




Pre-Court Outcomes
The majority of RJD/CR interventions delivered in 18/19 were successfully completed and closed - 56 out of 65.   This has been an improved performance on the previous year by 4%.  Of the 9 young people that did not successfully complete interventions with the Prevention Team/YJS, 7 chose not to engage, with only 2 referred back to the OIC for charge to court.  This is at the discretion of the officer in the case.  Meanwhile one young person had re-offended and another young person was issued with his CR at the Bureau Panel, who had felt no intervention was necessary.  30 victims were identified in total, with 3 willing to accept a letter of apology.  10 victims could not be contacted and a further 3 victims chose not to participate.  However, there were several victims identified where attempts had not been made to contact the victim.  This was during the period of significant staffing changes and new individuals in posts.  It was felt that too much time had lapsed during the transition to follow up contact with the victims.
 

Bureau
52 young people appeared at the Newport Bureau panel in 2018/19 - down by 16 from last year.  The effects of the new Gwent Bureau Protcol, meant that fewer young people are being referred to the Bureau here in Newport.  The majority of young people will have received / or are receiving an intervention from the YJS.
3 young people were charged to court as a result of non-compliance with the bureau process.
5 young people received a Youth Caution with no intervention.  This was due to the young people being days away from turning 18yrs, having no assessed needs, and/or already being in receipt of appropriate support.
In 2018/19, the most common offences comitted by the young people who appeared at the Bureau panel were those that were violence against the person, criminal damage, public order and drug offences.  The vast majority of the 52 were male with only  15 females referred.  The age range in 18/19 was those aged between 13 - 17yrs.  For males, the peak age for being referred to Bureau was between 14 - 17yrs, whilst for females it was those aged 15 or 16yrs.


Bureau. Trend of Out of Court Disposals  - 18/19


Bureau.  Types of Offences Committed 2018/19
		

BAME (Black and Minority Ethnic) - Bureau

The vast majority of young people coming through the Newport Bureau Panel are of white ethnic origin, with just 15 young people being of black and other minority ethnic origin.  Young people of white ethnic origin are seen to be more likely committing offences of assault, violence against the person, criminal damage and theft and handling.  Young people of non white origin have also been committing criminal damage and violence against persons.  They have also been responsible for public order offences, and being caught in possession of Class A or B drugs.









Bureau Outcomes
Bureau closed 55 cases in 18/19.  This is a reduction of 1 from the previous year.  82% had successfully completed their intervention (45/55).  Performance has reduced from 93% successful completions in 17/18.  42 victims were identified this year, with 2 victims willing to participate in a face to face restorative justice.  A further 21 victims chose to accept a letter of apology.

Overall, taking into account that victim participation concerning young people issued with out of court disposals has improved from last year, participation is still low, being 44%.  Common reasons for this low level of engagement include:
? Victims not being contactable, despite the YJS Police officer sending an initial letter with an appointment for a home visit
? Victims choosing not to participate as they may wish to put the matter behind them
? The YJS victim worker or Police officer may deem victim participation inappropriate.  This is usually the case when young people do not show remorse for the offence committed, if a serious offence has taken place within the young person's family and/or if there are domestic violence issues.
? Not a vehicle through which to get compensation






Court - Relate to young people who received sentences at court in 2018/19
There were 58 court outcomes issued at youth court in 18/19.  Ages ranged between 12 - 18yrs with the peak age being 16yrs for both gender.  We have continued to see more males than females sentenced at court, and saw 155 offences being committed by this group of young people.  Compared to 17/18, the number of Referral Orders issued have gone down and this year we see a milestone reduction in children from Newport sentenced to custody.  The number of Youth Rehabilitation Orders issued have increased by 6, and we have seen an increase in fines being issued to 17 year olds for motoring offences.  Conditional discharges issued at court have also increased.
Many of the children sentenced at court in 18/19, comitted more than one offence, with only 22 of the 59 sentenced comitting one offence.  Offences including violence, motoring, fraud and drugs  (largely possession with intent to supply), were the most common offence types seen in court during the year.  With the exception of two 17 year olds who were issued with a fine purely for speeding, many of the young people who comitted motoring offences were caught driving without licence or insurance.  An additional two young people were also charged with vehicle theft.  Many of the theft and handling offences were comitted by 2 females who are looked after by Newport Local Authority.  Whilst we see a total number of 20 Fraud offences comitted this year, these were the responsibility of just two young people.

Court Outcomes - Range of orders given in 2018/19
Intervention typeNumberMalesfemales10-  1314-1617+CLAAbsolute Discharge222Conditional Discharge633242Fine555RO2522314114YRO17134984Custody44121TOTAL5949101292910









Offences committed by those having statutory orders in 2018/19


BAME (Black and Minority Ethnic) - Court 

Young people of both black and white ethnic orgin were largely comitting offences that were violence against the person, motoring offences, and robbery.  One young person of Black ethnic orgin was responsible for 6 of these offences.  Young people of mixed ethnicity were also comitting similar offences  - violence against the person, however were also comitting low level public order offences, and being caught in posession of drugs (some with intent to supply).

BAME - Sentenced at court by ethnicity



Statutory Orders - Outcomes
70% of closed statutory orders in 2018/19, had been successfully completed, including one order that was revoked on the grouds of good progress.  The success rate continues to improve slightly, comparing to last year, when 68% of closed statutory orders were successfully completed.
13 of the 17 young people who did not finish their court orders, had re-offended and were issued with new orders.  4 young people had their orders revoked because of breach.
Meanwhile 2 Youth Rehabilitation Orders were transferred to Probation in 18/19, and 1 order was transferred to Bradford YJS in January 2019, 3 months after the young person had moved to that area.



Remands 2018/19

Number and age of young people remanded into Custody - 2018/19 
Age101112131415161718TotalMale12126Female

Reducing Offending in Children Looked After (ROLAC)
Referrals Closed in 2018/19

Number of Cases ClosedDuration of InterventionIntervention Successful9N/A9

10 new referrals in 2018/19 were made to YJS involving children looked after by Newport Council.  This included 6 children who had not committed any offences, so preventative interventions were offered. 4 young people received sentences in court. 
9 young people successfully finished their intervention with our ROLAC worker.  They all engaged positively with the worker.  

Reoffending
Pre court reoffending

Young people who were given an out of court disposal (OOCD) in 2017/18 are tracked for 12 months to identify whether or not they re-offended.  2018/19 saw the re-offending rate decrease slightly to 21.4%.  This is based on a cohort of 117 young people with 25 individuals re-offending.  The previous year, the rate of pre-court re-offending was 20.2%, however was based on a cohort of 168 young people with 34 young people re-offending. 
Statistics show the peak age for young males re-offending when they entered the cohort was 15years.  Most were initially subject of an RJD prior to re-offending. The 3 most common re-offences were assaults, theft and drug related offending. 
For young females, the peak age for re-offending was also 15years when they entered the cohort.  Similar to males, the most common previous interventions had been an RJD.  The most common re-offences for females were theft, violence and racially aggravated public order.

Post Court Re-offending

Young people who were sentenced to a statutory court order in 2017/18 were also tracked for 12 months to identify whether or not they re-offended.  2018/19 saw the re-offending rate as 39.1% with 25 out of 64 young people committing further offences.  This compared to the previous year shows a very slight decrease when the re-offending rate was 40.2%.  This involved 35 of 87 young people re-offending.  It is noted that these figures vary from those reported by the YJB, as the latter look at a different (historical cohort of young people). 
No peak age can be identified for males re-offending post court as the age ranges from 13 - 17 years.  Most had originally been subject of a referral order, with common offences being motoring, drug related, criminal damage and non-domestic burglary. In contrast, most females who re-offended came into the cohort at 16 years and were initially subject of a referral order.  The most common re-offences identified with females were theft and violence against the person.

Education, Training and Employment (ETE)
School Age - Average hours
Performance had increased this year from 12.2 hours to 15.5 hours.  4 out of the 5 young people who were not in full time education were on a reduced timetable, due to their vulnerabilities.  Only one young person was not attending school, despite a full timetable being provided for him.

Closed School Age Stautory Court Orders - April 2018 - March 2019

Over the course of the last 12 months, the average hours of education for school-age children has  increased over the duration of the young person's order, indicating that YJS involvement has been effective in achieving a positive outcome for the school aged young people.  A positive contribution will be that education intervention by the YJS is better- placed to offer the opportunity to adapt and tailor education packages to individual needs, recognising vulnerabilities and often-complex needs of the young person.

43% of post 16years young people were in 16 hours or more of ETE per week by the end of their order.  In most cases, the remainder were unemployed despite every effort being made to get young people to engage in ETE.  Average ETE hours 2018/19 had positively increased from 10.9 hours to 14.4 hours.

Post School 16 plus - Average hours


As part of Newport wide 16-18 Not in Education, Employment or Training (NEET) strategy, the YJS also places emphasis on reducing the number of young people leaving school at the end of Year 11 and becoming NEET, and strive to direct resources accordingly. 
There remains concern over the use of part-time timetables across schools and the Pupil Referral Unit, and this has been raised by the YJS  staff in several forums including the PRU Management Committee meetings, senior Education Managers and within Childrens Services.  Schools are reporting to be struggling to manage behaviour and as a result there has been increased referrals into the PRU. 

Access to Suitable Accommodation 
Suitability of Accommodation 2018/19

As the chart below indicates, the YJS generally meets performance targets in this area, and good collaborations with other agencies contribute to this success. 
However, it should be noted the challenge of finding suitable accommodation, particularly secure accommodation for our most vulnerable young people remains a significant challenge.  This is a particular area of challenge when trying to balance not criminalising young people - child first, offender second, with the need to appropriately safeguard young people particularly at risk of child criminal exploitation and serious organised crime and/or violence.



				Substance Misuse
Of our closed statutory caseload in 2018/19, 26 young people required a Substance Misuse assessment, with 25 commencing within 5 working days, after the referral was made.  23 young people required an intervention programme, with 22 commencing within 10 working days after the assessment was completed.
We continue to see strong performance in this indicator, with only one young person not meeting timescales for assessment and another young person not meeting timescales to begin their Intervention programme, following the completion of the assessment.   This can in part be attributed to the continuation of the change in operational process and staffing issues.  There was a period between November 2018 - February 2019, where YJS did not have a dedicated Substance Misuse Worker.  As a contingency plan, the YJS were able to make contact with and refer to BAROD Substance Misuse Service, a Community Drug and Alcohol service for young people across Gwent.
 



The new SMW has built a good rapport with young people who have complex needs and vulnerabilities.  Extra support was provided to assist with some of our more complex cases, including  those who are children looked after by the local authority.  This was in the form of joint sessions with the young person's case manager or other partnership workers such as our YJS Clinical Nurse Specialist and Speech and Language Therapist.  This is proving more effective in securing engagement and addressing the co-occurring issues rather than making the young person go through their story on multiple cases with multiple assessments. 
The SMW has attended the Attachment and Trauma Training with the rest of the team, in addition to attending Coaching training with Barod.  She has produced Information booklets, for young people highlighting each substance and the harm that it causes.  This is issued to every young person referred to the SMW regardless of whether or not they choose to engage
Emotional and Mental Health
2018/19 saw a continuation of issues with data and exchange of information from ABUHB to YJS for Bureau and the new Community Resolution (CR) cases.  This was concerning the sharing of primarily lateral checks information.  On-going discussions to resolve these issues were taking place involving the Clinical Nurse Specialist. Young people referred to the CNS are considered complex with a high level of attachment difficulties.  Engagement can often be difficult recognising that these young people will have experienced trauma and usually a high prevalence of Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACES).  
This year, the YJS CNS acted up as Forensic Lead for all 3 Gwent Youth Offending Services for a period of time. The worker was including the managerial side of his role into the working week, and was committed to restricting the managerial side to one working day a week.  Agreement was reached that should it affect too much on the clinical work availability, this would be reviewed.  There was also a challenge with a lack of access to a health computer at the YJS meaning he has to carry out some of the tasks required as part of his managerial role at St Cadoc's Hospital.



Custody
We have continued to see the downward trajectory in the use of custody since 2014. 2018/19 saw only 4 children from Newport sentenced to a custodial order, the lowest it has ever been in the history of Newport Youth Justice service.  The previous year saw 9 custodial orders, given to 8 children from Newport.  






Children Looked After
Whilst caseloads have increased slightly, the number of young people looked after by Newport LA and involved with the YJS is falling.  At the end of March 2018 there was 75 young people open to YJS.  15 of these were under the care of the local authority (20%).  A year later saw this figure alter to 9 young people who were looked after, out of a total of 85 (10%). 
In this financial year we had no looked after young person being caretaken out of county by other YJS, although we were caretaking 2 looked after children - one from Wrexham, the other from Neath-Port Talbot.   Other areas do not necessarily have access to the ROLAC support offered in Newport and of our remaining 8 looked after cases in Newport, 3 have been referred to the ROLAC, 2 of whom have engaged well. 

Priorities for 2019 - 21
These are included in the 2019-21 business plan (Appendix 6).
Team Work Plan - Summer 2019 (Appendix 7)

Conclusion
It has undoubtedly been an unsettled year for the YJS in Newport during 18/19. Whilst the dedicated team ensured operations continued, what did suffer with the absence of key staff was the progress and development of the service, particularly taking forward the recommendations of the Peer Review.  Ideally, the service would have been further along the road with some key areas of work, however rather than looking backwards, we are now in a position of positively looking forward.  The new service manager brings vision and energy to progressing agreed priorities, including an improved quality assurance system to all areas of the service, including staff a performance framework.  The Board is committed to refocussing its responsibilities and open to developing its knowledge and engagement with the team.  As such, a recent development session between the YJ team and Board members was viewed by the board as such a valuable investment, they have requested these take place now twice yearly.  
The reduction of young people entering the youth criminal justice system enables the team greater capacity to utilise their many resources in a more preventative and collaborative way.  It is expected that case managers will develop lead roles in designated areas to raise the profile and availability of support from the YJS.  The Diversionary Officers are taking on more case management responsibility for those young people issues with a Community Resolution (CR).  This will support the professional development of the DO, and enable them to have far more ownership and responsibility for the work they undertake.
The Restorative Justice work is to be led by a team of 3, supporting and ensuring that  restorative approaches and victim work is fully embedded across the whole team.  This work will extend to colleagues in residential homes in Newport, as the team look to progress training and collaborations with staffing working with some of the same young people.
A revitalised volunteer recruitment and training programme is already underway, with the team actively  participating in this. A group of 10 new volunteers are about to undergo an induction evening in partnership with the Prevention Service.    
The team is actively engaging with senior partners and managers as we continue to consider  how to provide improved outcomes for a small cohort of young people involved with Child Criminal Exploitation (CCE) and Serious Organised Crime (SOC) and Serious Violence.  Recognising that traditional Child Protection responses will not necessarily provide greater safeguards, Newport YJS is pro- actively engaged with developing a multi-agency strategy for managing this area of work, with a contextual safeguarding framework.  
A huge amount of exciting opportunities to be developed in the next couple of years, however equally important is bringing stability for the team.  A planned restructure led by the new service manager is underway to ensure greater efficiencies from the resources available whilst bringing clarity of roles and responsibilities.
With the support and guidance of the new Strategic Partnership Board, commitment already demonstrated by the staff teams, together with flexibility and innovation, the Youth Justice Service will strive to provide the best possible outcomes to young people in Newport.  

Approved by Newport YOS Local Management Board 
      
      
      
      
James Harris - Strategic Director, Newport City Council
Chair of Newport YJS Strategic Partnership Board
26th July 2019









List of Appendices
Appendix 1		Peer Review Report 2018	


Appendix 2		Management Board attendance 18/19
	

Appendix 3		Business plan 2017/18 with updates


Appendix 4		Staffing by Agency, gender and ethnicity


Appendix 5	Gwent Out of Court Disposal Framework, incorporating the Bureau Panel Process




Appendix 6		Newport Youth Justice Business Plan 2019-21


Appendix 7		Newport Youth Justice Team Work Plan Summer 2019



Appendix 8		Restorative Justice Team Work Plan 19-20

Newport Youth Justice Report and Plan 2019-21


1 | Page


