
NORTH TYNESIDE
YOUTH JUSTICE SERVICE
STRATEGIC PLAN 2019 - 2021


		


CONTENTS
Introduction -  Chair of the YJS Management Board.		Page 3
Introduction -  YJS Manager. 					Page 4
Review of 2018 - 2019 priorities.				Page 5
What children and young people tell us.			Page 6
What parents and carers tell us.				Page 7
What victims tell us.						Page 8
What staff tell us.						Page 9
What strategic partners tell us.					Page 10
Performance objectives review 2018 - 2019.			Page 11 - 14
Operational delivery objectives 2019 - 2021. 			Page 15
Strategic development objectives 2019 - 2021.			Page 16
Resources Embedded.	(Table 5)				Page 16								
Staffing Embedded (table B7 & B8)				Page 16
Youth Justice Service Management Board members sign off.	Page 17


STRATEGIC PLAN - CHAIR
I am really delighted to introduce the North Tyneside Youth Justice Service strategic plan for 2019 -2021, on behalf of the management board. We are rightly, very proud of the achievements of our Youth Justice Service. Against our nationally defined performance outcomes we have seen positive progress in the last year with a significant reduction in the number of young people entering the youth justice system for the first time, maintenance of the low number  of young people receiving a custodial sentence and reoffending rates that are better than regional and national performance. We continue to strive for better outcomes and as a Management Board we are committed to learning from, the highest-performing areas in England. We recognise that to achieve progress we need continued innovation and greater integration across services and the partnership. 
Both as a service and as a strategic partnership we are committed to a child centred approach that puts relationships and the building of sustainable support networks at the heart of how we work alongside young people and their families. It is very wonderful to see the comments in this plan from young people and families really reflecting the quality of relationships with staff and how valuable and appreciated this is. We will further build on this and the impact we know it can have by looking at the ratio of time we spend between case recording and direct work with young people and their families. 
While relationship based practice is our foundation, our approach is strongly underpinned by our practice framework of Signs of Safety, a strength based model, that is further complimented by a trauma informed approach to our work in the service. These models of practice are shaping our work in a really positive way and this is also beginning to have impact on how we want to work with victims of crime, as well as our wider communities.
This is an ambitious plan and while we will work hard to drive further improvements across the full range of outcome measures, as a priority we will reduce the number of young people entering the youth justice system for the first time, through the introduction of an Out of Court Panel which will be established jointly with Northumbria Police and Northumberland Youth Offending Service. We will also prioritise a review of our practice relating to the service victims receive and within this refresh our approach to restorative practice.  
As a Management Board we will support this plan by providing both support and challenge to the service and the partnership in order to foster ambition and maintain the pace of improvement but ultimately to ensure the right outcomes for young people, their families, victims and communities. In a time of increasing risks for young people and a growing complexity of need we will also explore integrated governance, around adolescent services that work in a collaborative way to reduce risk and increase resilience for young people who are often vulnerable to exploitation from others, involved in offending and displaying high risk behaviours.
Julie Firth 
INTRODUCTION - MANAGER
The Youth Justice Plan provides the detail as to how North Tyneside Youth Justice Service (YJS) have performed over the last 12 months, what the key operational and strategic objectives objective will be for the forthcoming year. In addition it details the resourcing and composition of the YJS as required.

The previous YJ Plan (2018-2019) set out 5 key priorities for performance and development. The YJS has achieved all of the 5 objectives as detailed on page 5. The team have worked hard over the year with ever reducing resources and increasingly challenging and more complex children so against this backdrop it is a credit to all.

North Tyneside Youth Justice Service has always taken a child centred approach to the work it undertakes as we know that children who become involved in offending and anti social behaviour have often experienced a higher level of adverse childhood experiences than those who don't. Over the last 12 months the team along with key partners have received training in Trauma Informed Practice, use of Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE's) and Enhanced Case management. This has challenged and also legitimised the approach the service takes with the children we work with as we have continued to adapt the way we approach and attempt to engage children as well as giving a more informed approach to interventions and enforcement.

In addition, the YJS has, as part of a whole North Tyneside approach, adopted and amended all processes to reflect the Signs of Safety practice model. Whilst this has been a challenge, the feedback from parents, children and workers is really positive describing a more interactive and strength based approach to planning and supervision.

We have worked to review our work against the new HMI Probation inspection framework and have welcomed the revised Youth Justice Board National standards which have further enabled us to be creative in the way we engage our children, many whom have little trust in adults and have experienced a higher level of trauma and loss. 

We have embraced the opportunity to work more collaboratively with our immediate youth justice neighbours to rationalise and streamline services due to the coterminous relationship due to the Police Command Area. We will further explore options over the forthcoming period. 

We pride ourselves in "going the extra mile" and doing the right thing for the child and family. By building self esteem, empathy and resilience, staying consistent and "being there" we will support our children to reach their true potential. With this in mind we intend to further integrate the work of the YJS to further improve outcomes for children and their families. The forthcoming period will see the development of an Adolescent Service that takes a holistic approach to improving outcomes.

Pete Xeros 


REVIEW OF 2018 - 2019 PRIORITIES

Reduce the number of first time entrants
Whilst there has been a reduction in the rate of first time entrants, the YJS performance for 2018 - 2019 remains slightly higher that our statistical family. It is recognised  that across the Northumbria Police area, all YJS's have higher than National  FTE rates, so with this in mind I am pleased that we have made a reduction. This in part was activity undertaken against the actions identified within the previous years YJ Plan. 
Much work has been undertaken in respect of FTE which will form the basis of the next 12 months developments via an Out of Court Panel process.
Maintain low levels of custodial sentencing
The use of custody within North Tyneside has remained constant over the last 12 months with a total of 5 Detention and Training Order's being issued, which was the aspirational target set during the period 2018 to 2019 by the YJS Management Board. The 5 sentences were issued to 3 young people reflecting multiple sentences. Whilst the number is low, our rate is slightly higher than our statistical family rates and as such, this are of work will remain an operational objective for the forthcoming year. 
Reduce to rate of re-offending
The work undertaken over during 2018 to 2019 has proven effective as the rate of reoffending against the YJS "live tracker" has seen a further reduction against the previous 12 months. The rate of reoffending was 33.1% which is better than the YJ Board aspirational target set of 40% or below.
 In respect of the MOJ performance data, North Tyneside has seen a 12 month rate of 39.7% which is better than the regional average and better that our statistical family. 
To improve the health and wellbeing of young people involved in serious and persistent offending
Following securing funding via NHS England, Health and Justice, we commissioned a three day Trauma Informed Practice programme which all YJS staff and 25 key partners attended.
The training has assisted in a greater understanding and impact of trauma and attachment on our children and informed us how better to approach work that is meaningful. It also gave us the ability to justify spending time with our children as clearly the most effective tool to impact on behaviour change, is a meaningful relationship. In September 2019 the YJS will fully introduce an Enhanced Case Management approach with the appointment of a Clinical Psychologist.   We have continued to health screen all children, have direct access to leisure facilities Ease Cards and ensure all children are registered with a GP.  
WHAT THE CHILDREN TELL US

"We don't like lots of changes of YOT worker or social worker.  We find it hard to trust people and don't like it when people leave us".
"I find it easy to talk to my worker but I know that they have to share information with the police and sometimes visit me with the police to try to keep me safe, but they tell me".
"I don't like coming to YOT appointments, I just want to be out with my mates but my worker always checks in with me to make sure I'm safe, that I've eaten and that I'm OK if I've been missing.  I've turned up drunk before and the YOT team sat with me, got me to drink water and eat something and let my Mam know where I was.  My YOT worker has picked me up before when I've been missing and made sure I got home safe".
"My YOT worker has told my parents how I'm feeling or why I'm behaving a certain way when sometimes I don't feel able to".
"We genuinely know that the YOT team care about us and want what's best for us, even if we don't agree with them".  
"The YOT team are like my second family, they've known me and my family for years and saw me grow up".
"I know I shouldn't be, but I'm glad I got a Referral Order as I was supported with moving into my own flat and all the way through my pregnancy and learning to be a Mam".
"I said in Court that my previous Referral Order had been really helpful and my YOT worker was really supportive and easy to talk to, I probably shouldn't have as I got another longer one".
"My YOT worker is always there for me, whether I'm doing well, in the police station or being released from custody.  He went off for an operation for a few months and I found it really hard and ended up missing some appointments".
"I find it really easy to talk to my YOT worker about how I'm feeling; my friends and family would probably laugh.  She's helped me through 2 bad break ups which we had said were my riskiest times".  
" I was just about to kick off with the housing people then I heard your voice in my head telling me to explain without shouting why I was not happy with them - it was that Jedi mind trick thing that you do".
Key points for action
* We will ensure that every child has the opportunity to form a consistent and meaningful relationship with their YJS worker
* We will support our children to engage in effective work to enable them to understand the impact of their behaviour on others but also how others behaviours influence their decision making
* We will work with our partners to develop a wider range of opportunities for children to engage in leisure and learning that will support them in keeping out of trouble and achieving their goals.

(information taken from young people's feedback)

WHAT PARENTS AND CARERS TELL US

"I would like to thank you personally and also the Police for using their discretion. This has been a difficult time for all of us and X has been really upset at the thought of talking about the assault. It's good to see that common sense has prevailed and that an organisation like yours is sensitive to people's needs, thank you very much indeed".
"I have found the YOT helpful as X seems to have listened to some of the things Paul has talked about. She has not been in bother with the Police since she returned to live with me.  Paul doing home visits and gaining Xs trust has helped the most, and the Christmas hamper was also very useful.  It was less helpful having to come to the Riverside for the meetings.  The YOT has helped but X still has a long way to go".
"Where do I start? YJS have been amazing. Very quickly I had confidence that X would be supported and receive the help he needed. Jade has been great in keeping me in the loop".
"YJS has been great and getting her on a programme over the summer has been fantastic. He is obviously doing something right as she is getting up every morning and getting ready to go on this programme.  This is fantastic for me as it is keeping her out of trouble".
"Tom is the first person that X has worked with and gets on with. Also that as a parent I feel that Tom really listens to my views".

Key Points for action
* We will provide the relevant information to all parents; provide support and advocacy to ensure they secure the necessary services for their children
* We will engage with parents with empathy, recognising they are worried and will support them to repair the relationship they have with their child and to improve the wider family relationship.

(Information taken from parent feedback forms)







WHAT VICTIMS TELL US

"I have not been affected in any way by this offence.  I would recommend that the young person receives support with regards to his emotional wellbeing as there seems to be a lot of issues surrounding his behaviour".
"I do not hold any untoward feelings towards the youths that committed the offence, I  just want them to simply understand the impact of their actions and how this affects others. I pointed out the youths were local and may even find a need to use the church in the future or maybe a family member. Also the serious danger they put themselves in and how injury could have been life changing to them if they had of fallen". 
"I would be happy for the offender to complete reparation around the church while supervised in order to try and repair some of them harm caused and give a little back to the community that work hard to keep things running".
"I knew the offender he was a younger child and accessed our centre. I know he had a hard time and I can see why he got to where he is. I was happy to meet up with him and it was nice to see him again to explain the impact to him".
"I didn't want to meet the offender initially but was given time and support by YJS and eventually met up face to face. I felt so much better after and we now chat at school and things were good at the prom".
"I do not want to be involved in any RJ as I think it would make things worse".
"It is difficult when you are a parent and a victim as you still have to attend Court with them but can end up with fines for the offence against you".
Key points for action
* We will undertake a full review of the process of consulting victims and restorative justice opportunities that takes a wider partnership approach.
* We will ensure that all Out of Court assessments have victim information including corporate to improve restorative opportunities and victim satisfaction. 
* We will work with our partners to expand the level of restorative practice undertaken across the childrens workforce.

(information taken from victim feedback forms)


WHAT STAFF TELL US

"We all care about the wellbeing of our young people and want the best possible outcomes for them".
"We advocate for our children and listen to their views".
"We have a great team culture - we are skilled, committed and want to improve the lives of the families in our borough (whether that be our families or victims)".
"We do not have good enough access to other services e.g. counselling, mental health, accommodation, ETE".
"There are not good resources for our young people in relation to education, accommodation, affordable leisure".
"We work jointly with the YOT PCs and try to divert children away from the criminal justice system".
"We feel that we are doing the role of social workers and that our safeguarding concerns are not taken seriously when we raise them".
"We are flexible. We support with everything".
"We advocate to family members and professionals".
"Access to emotional and mental health services are a challenge".
"We're honest; the young people know where they stand and what information we share".
"The time spent undertaking Assetplus, form filling and duties, takes us away from spending time with our children/families".
"We build up positive relationships with young people and they feel they can trust us, we understand they don't like lots of changes". 
Key Points for action
* We will re-balance our practice model, reducing desk-based activity to free time for more direct work with our children and families.
* We will take a focus on the educational opportunities for children with a focus on those on reduced timetables.
* We will work with the seconded Psychologist to improve the emotional wellbeing of our children and develop meaningful interventions for those most disenfranchised.

(Information taken from Signs of Safety 3 columns undertaken with whole staff team) 








WHAT THE STRATEGIC PARTNERS TELL US



"There are a wide range of and types of Intervention/Outcomes the service delivers including the Police".
"It's really positive that the YJS is Co Located".
"We have seen an improvement in the process for those young people transitioning to Probation but need to strengthen other key transition pathways".
"Through the presentations that staff provide at each Board meeting, it is clear that we have staff who go the extra mile who have really positive relationships with the children and family".
"It's excellent that the service has adopted Trauma Informed Approach to the work undertaken".
"We recognise that it is based upon movement within organsiations but we recognise that stable Board representation is key to becoming more effective".
"The range of work streams that are discussed at the Board are sometimes too wide, we would appreciate that we move to have Specific themed discussions on a particular subject and with  performance Report to accompany".
"The Board would like a standing item at the Board regarding the Re-Offending Live Cohort - Performance Report".
"We recognise that there is a need to further Board development". 
"Its always positive to see that there is little movement of staff and the service has a Stable staff team".
Key points for action
* We will improve the Partnership approach to improving transition
* We will Produce  specific performance reports
* We will  have specific themed  discussions at Board meetings.
* We will look at The YJS Management Board (All integrated model)
* We will undertake continued Board Development

"We have appreciated YJS staff bring cases to the Board meeting as it enables us to have a better understanding of the challenges they face. However, we would like he cases to be those that the worker feels is stuck and that require the Boards direct involvement to move it forward".


(Information taken from Signs of Safety 3 columns undertaken with Management Board) 


PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES
Reduction of First Time Entrants








Use of Custody






Reduction of Re-offending - Youth Justice Service Data 2017/18




 2017/2018 Cohort 2016/2017 CohortNumber in Cohort133109Percentage who Re-offended33.10%37.20%Frequency Rate of Re-offending3.814.27








Ministry of Justice Published Data

Below shows the current published data by the Ministry of Justice.  This chart shows the binary rate of re-offending (% of young people who re-offend in the cohort) for the North Tyneside, North East, Northumbria and England Area.  North Tyneside have seen a reduction in re-offending over the 6 year period shown below, to under 40% in the most recently published annual cohort data.  This is better than the regional, Northumbria and National average. 



OPERATIONAL DELIVERY OBJECTIVES
What do we wantWhat will we doHow will we knowReduction in the  prolific and high risk re-offending rate* The YJS will build upon the existing risk register with a specific focus on those committing the highest number of offences and those most at risk of causing harm. 
* We will introduce a  weekly update and mapping approach. 
* We will introduce Enhanced Case Management. * Reduced rates and frequency of offending by the cohort.
* Improved outcomes for the identified cohort.
* Enhanced case management procedures embedded into the YJS.
* Improved outcomes for our Looked after children.Maintain the low use of custody
* Reviewing all cases of young people remanded or sentenced. 
* Quality Assurance and management oversight of all potential custody cases. . 
* Ensuring resettlement begins at the point of sentence. 
* Continued low use of custody.
* High quality reports produced that minimise the use of custody.
* High quality resettlement practice in all occasions.Reduction in First Time Entrants* Through a collaborative approach with Northumberland YOS, we intend to introduce an Out of Court Panel (OOCP).
* Undertaking a restorative approach to all young people coming into contact with the criminal justice system.
* Work collaboratively with NTW who deliver the Health Liaison and Diversion service.
* Introduce an improved OOC assessment tool which meets all statutory requirements.
* Work with ETE providers to improve outcomes.
* Reduce the rate of our Looked after Children receiving formal criminal justice outcomes.* OOCP fully operational by December 2019.
* Every relevant case has a thorough RJ intervention based upon the wishes of the victim.
* Have clear pathways in place for children with additional health needs.
* Reduction in the occasions where AssetPlus is required to be used.
* North Tyneside rate of offending is below the national average
* Improved ETE outcomes.Review and improve services for victims* We will undertake a full review of the practice relating to the service victims receive from the YJS including all aspects of Restorative Justice.* Clear and timely victim consultation procedures in place. 
* Higher rate of "take" up by identified victims.
* Improved confidence in the impact RJ can provide.Implement Enhanced Case Management * Embed a Clinical Psychologist into the YJS.
* Identify the key children for whom Enhanced case Management will be used.
* Improved intervention plans based upon a clinical formulation.
* Improved outcomes and reduction in frequency/seriousness of offending.
STRATEGIC DELIVERY OBJECTIVES
What do we wantWhat will we doHow will we knowAll Children will have access to appropriate health services at the right time* Support development of appropriate provision.
* Challenge exclusionary barriers.
* Explore an integrated practice model.* Monitor and measure provision/access.
* Improved emotional wellbeing.
* Reduction in reoffending/ FTE.Explore opportunities for North of Tyne collaborative working practice* Engage with the North of Tyne Youth Offending Teams.
* Agree standardised practice protocols/Service level agreements with statutory partners.
* Review current cross authority practices.* Consistent approaches to offending.
* Improved stakeholder investment.
* Improved performance North of Tyne.
* Value for money
Introduction of Contextual safeguarding* Application of models of contextual safeguarding to adolescent risk taking behaviour within an offending context.* Explore models.
* Develop proposals.
* Prepare and present papers to YJS. Management Board.Every young person will have access to appropriate ETE that meets their needs to reach their potential * Support development of appropriate provision.
* Support parents to secure needed services.
* Provide information, advice and advocacy.
* Challenge exclusionary barriers.* Improved engagement and attainment.
* Feedback from children and families.
* Feedback from schools and providers.
* Reduced offending and ASB.Explore the Feasibility of integrated governance around adolescent risk taking behaviours* Present an option paper to the YJS management board and CYPL leadership team about advantages and challenges of a new model.* Discussion and key outcomes auctioned.A comprehensive and consistent service will be available to all victims* Review current practice with key statutory partners.
* Develop a North Tyneside value and practice guide.
* More victims engaging in the YJS.
* Increased confidence and high satisfaction ratesNote, these aspirational goals will require extensive partnership development over a period of years.

Table 5 - YJS Budget

Table B7 Staffing by Contract type
Table B8 Staffing by gender and ethnicity
YJS Management Board signatures
NAMEDESIGNATIONSIGNATUREDATEJulie FirthAssistant Director for Prevention and Safeguarding 23.08.19 Rob Bosson
Acting C/I Northumbria Police
Harm Reduction 
Sheila Askew
Senior Operational Support Manager 
North of Tyne Cluster
NPS ( NE ) Division
Janet ArrisNorth Tyneside CCG 
Children and Young People NHS Commissioning Manger
 Wendy Burke
 Public Health Commissioner
Mark BarrettSenior Manager Information Advice and Guidance
Jill Robson
Partnership Manager
Job Centre Plus
James Parker

Chair of Northern Youth BenchRichard Mitchell
Community Protection manager
North Tyneside Council
Claire Robinson
Chief Executive
Props North East

1


