
 
 
Contents 
 
 
1. Foreword by the Chair of the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Management Board 
 
2. Introduction 
• The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Values and Principles 
• Youth Justice Plan Key Priorities 
 
3. Review of progress of the 2017 - 2019 North Lincolnshire Youth Justice Plan 
• Summary of Progress and Performance 
• Progress Made and Innovative Practice 
• Thematic Reports and North Lincs Youth Offending Service Response 
 
4. Key Developments for Continued Improvement 2019 - 2021 
 
5. Structure and Governance 
• Quality Assurance, Audit and Practice Development 
• The Youth Offending Partnership 
• The Youth Offending Management Board 
 
6. Resources and Value for Money ? 	Value for Money   
• Impact and Outcomes  
• Staff Resources and Workforce Development 
• North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Staff Structure Chart 
 
7. Partnership arrangements 
 
8. Risks to Future Delivery 
 
 
Appendix 1: Partner contributions to the youth offending partnership pooled budget 2019/20 
 
Appendix 2:  Delivery Plan 
 
 
9. Approval and sign off 
1.  	Foreword 
 
 
 
 	Foreword by Nick Hamilton-Rudd, Chair of the North 
 	Lincolnshire Youth Offending Management Board 
  
 
 
I have pleasure in presenting the reviewed and updated North Lincolnshire's Youth Justice Plan for 2019 - 2021. This plan details our commitment to helping children to live safe, successful lives within their communities and families and to reduce their involvement in the criminal justice system. It sets out the priorities for the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Partnership, how partners will continue to work together to build on the strong picture in North Lincolnshire with a focus on promoting resilience and engagement with communities and plans for further developing the youth offending partnership.  
 
This plan also reviews the progress and successes achieved and how the partnership will continue to deliver improved outcomes for some of the most vulnerable young people, with a focus on engagement with positive and constructive activities so that they can contribute to the communities they live in, have high aspirations and achieve their potential.  
 
The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service continues to provide services that make a difference for young people, their families and the community as a whole. There is a continued focus on prevention from offending through holistic family approaches, working with children and their families to help them address the issues that lead to children and young people becoming involved with criminal and anti-social behaviour.  
 
The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Partnership's success can be seen in the improved outcomes it has achieved and have continued: 
 
• First time entrants have continued to reduce and are at the lowest recorded level.  
• Maintained low numbers of young people who are sentenced to custody.  
• Young people in full-time Education, Employment and Training (ETE) continues to be higher than Humberside and England averages.  
• Young people living in suitable accommodation at the end of an order has remained strong during 2018/19  
• Prevention and out of court disposals continue to be a high and increasing proportion of the work of the partnership.   
• All victims of crime are contacted as part of all out of court disposals  
 
Although much has been achieved our aspirations continue to be to achieve more and ensure that communities are safe places to live without fear of crime, to provide opportunities that further improve the outcomes for children in North Lincolnshire and continue to reduce the number of children who become involved in the youth justice system.  
 

Nick Hamilton-Rudd 
Chair of the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Management Board
2.  	Introduction 
 
The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service (YOS) is a statutory multi-agency service and is situated in Children and Community Resilience within North Lincolnshire Council. It is an integral part of the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Partnership and is overseen by the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Management Board. 
 
The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Values and Principles 
 
The service aims to prevent offending by children and young people through a partnership approach that builds resilience. The service is underpinned by the belief that young people within the criminal justice system should be seen first and foremost as children. The work of the YOS is geared towards ensuring this principle is demonstrated by our practice.  
 
The YOS believes that crucial to achieving success, change and positive outcomes for young people is the ability to engage with young people and their families and have a relationship with each young person that promotes resilience and the opportunity for individuals to develop 'good lives'.  
 
This includes ensuring that services focus on both reducing and preventing offending or antisocial behaviour and the provision of the help the family need, including family support, health provision, education, training and employment opportunities, suitable accommodation and assistance to young people to participate and engage in positive activities within their communities.  
 
The Youth Justice Plan Key Priorities 
 
The key Priorities within Youth justice plan reflect national and local indicators that are driven by local priorities for children, young people and the community of North Lincolnshire: 
 
The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Partnership priorities, overseen by the Youth Offending Management Board, are: 
 
• Reducing the numbers of first time entrants to youth justice. 
• Preventing and reducing the seriousness of offending and re-offending by children through: o Building individual and community resilience 
o Promoting engagement with positive activities and opportunities o Promoting engagement with education, training and employment o Reducing vulnerabilities including the risks of sexual and criminal exploitation 
o Alternatives to the use of custody and overnight remands 
• Community Safety, public protection and services to victims of youth crime 
 
Value for money - As an accountable and publicly funded body, the Youth Offending Service is committed to ensuring value for money via robust budget management and effective service delivery. The service ensures that resources are deployed appropriately within the YOS structure to meet the changing demands of a smaller convicted cohort, with increased preventative and out of court disposal interventions.   
 
 


	3.  	Review of the 2017- 2019 North Lincolnshire Youth Justice Plan 
 
Summary of Progress and Performance 
 
The progress and performance of the Youth Offending Partnership is reported to each Youth Offending Management Board for scrutiny, oversight and action. During the period of the 2017 - 2019 Youth Justice Plan, this included: 
 
Prevention of Offending and First Time Entrants 
 
A continuing decrease in young people involved in offending in North Lincolnshire. The number of first time entrants to youth justice reduced to its lowest recorded level - locally measured at 122/100,000 during 2018/19. There is a clear focus on preventative work and young people are appropriately offered a prevention intervention or 
Community Resolution. The success of this is demonstrated by the continuing very low number of young people previously supported through community resolutions subsequently becoming first time entrants.  
 
Victims of Crime 
 
All victims of crime were contacted as part of all out of court disposals where there is a victim. This includes asking whether they would wish to be involved in restorative approaches - including restorative conferences; youth justice panels; direct and indirect reparation; the "doing sorry" intervention; a letter of explanation and, where reparation is indirect, victims are offered a menu to choose from.   
 
The YOS ensured that the Referral Order guidance (2018) was fully implemented and worked flexibly to ensure that Youth Justice Panels were held in venues and at times convenient to the victim utilising restorative approaches. 
 
Reducing Re-offending 
 
Whilst the number of FTEs in North Lincolnshire has continued to reduce, 
demonstrating the success of early help and preventative work across the partnership, the proportion of those who have subsequently reoffended over the previous 2 years has shown a slight increase (of 0.5%) during 2018/19. Due to the small and decreasing numbers in the cohort, the reoffending rate has been more volatile. 
 
The youth offending partnership continued to prioritise reducing re-offending through:  
 
• Engagement and work with the whole family, including parents in the plan  
• Relational and holistic models of work within families and communities 
• Promoting and supporting engagement with education, employment and 
training 
• Continuing to ensure the support and provision of suitable accommodation to increase successful achievement of orders in the community.  
• Focused on reducing substance misuse including education and training 
• Continued development of the Harmful Sexual Behaviour prevention work, including interventions focusing on social media.   
• Continuing to support young people once their order has ended for 6-9 5 
 
months 
• Management oversight of quality and focus of work through audits, reviews and performance management - including audits by managers from other services. 
• The use of cross-authority peer audits to inform and improve practice 
• The NUDGE model of practice continues to be well-embedded within the YOS. 
 
Alternatives to Custody 
There continues to be a low number of children sentenced to or remanded to custody. This has been achieved by the focus on preventative work and the family as a whole, use of robust bail support, including bail Intensive Supervision and Surveillance where appropriate, building resilience through supporting young people in their education, training and employment, robust alternatives to remand to youth detention 
accommodation packages (including remand Foster Care and bail support), use of the early guilty plea where appropriate, consistent use of local community pre-release meetings - to ensure that resources are in place as young people are released from custody (in addition to custody pre-release meetings).  
 
Suitable Accommodation, Education, Employment and Training 
 
A key factor in reducing re-offending, custody and remands is addressing the connection with the accommodation and education, employment and training (EET) status of young people. Young people involved with the youth justice system are therefore included as a priority vulnerable group in the local authority accommodation strategy and as a priority in ensuring they are supported to access EET. 
 
The YOS ensures that Young people have suitable accommodation that meets their needs. Young people living in suitable accommodation at the end of their programme was 98% for 2018/19 compared to 76% across England.    
 
The YOS also prioritised access to and engagement with education employment and training including for those young people identified as having SEND. Youth Justice Board ETE data 2017/18 in relation to young people supervised by North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service continues to be 60% for 2018/19 compared to 44% across England. 
    
 
Progress Made and Innovative Practice 
 
Relocation of the Courts and Police Custody Suite 
 
North Lincolnshire Magistrates Court closed in January 2017 and moved to a neighbouring authority, the impact of the court closure and relocation was reviewed through the Youth Offending Management Board. Close liaison with the Court continues and creative solutions have been developed to ensure there is limited impact on young people and their families. 
 
The North Lincolnshire Police Custody Suite closed in March 2019 and also relocated to the neighbouring authority. To ensure that there has been no impact on 
6 
 the young people from North Lincolnshire, interim arrangements have been implemented with the local Youth Offending Service to jointly provide Appropriate Adults as needed. Close liaison continues with the neighbouring YOS and the Police. This has also been reviewed through the Youth Offending Management Board and updates continue to be provided to the board. 
 
Volunteers 
 
Youth offending service volunteers, including Youth Justice Panel and appropriate adult volunteers received Community Champion Awards during 2017/18  They won the category for the 'Community' This recognised the individual volunteers dedication to the volunteer role, their hard work, commitment, and for the work they have contributed to in their community.   
 
Harmful Sexual Behaviour Project (HSB) 
 
The North Lincolnshire Harmful Sexual Behaviour model consists of a virtual team dedicated to managing Harmful Sexual Behaviour (HSB) from early identification through to assessment, risk management, planning and the delivery of interventions.  The team comprises a Harmful Sexual Behaviour Panel of multi-agency senior managers and a Harmful Sexual Behaviour Practitioner Group, both drawn from professional disciplines, including Social Work, Youth Offending, Child and 
Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS), Police, Educational Psychology, Health, Family Support Services (FaSST), Behaviour Support and Education and Inclusion services.  
 
The HSB approach has been successful in enabling packages to be presented to the courts as alternatives to custody with likely improved outcomes for the children. The programme continues to inform pre-sentencing reports and assessment to inform decision-making and sentence planning in courts. 
 
The programme prevents re-offending through joint multi agency risk management and  the application of the 'Good Lives' model, jointly managed risk management plans and bespoke interventions following an 'AIM2' assessment and sentencing if relevant. Plans always involve parents or carers, expected outcomes are agreed with them and the child/young person.  The approach has continued to be successful in reducing harmful sexual behaviour and potential offending. 
 
Prevention 
 
The programme of crime safety awareness days continued, targeting children identified by schools across North Lincolnshire. Attendance at these events and subsequent referrals into the YOS have been monitored in order to measure the effectiveness of the events. The YOS continued to work closely with the ASB and Police Early Intervention teams to intervene effectively and divert children and young people from involvement in anti-social and criminal behaviour. 
 
The service has a well-developed and pro-active approach to the understanding of, identification, and reduction of risks to and of Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE) and Child Criminal Exploitation (CCE). The YOS managers actively participate in the Multi-Agency Child Exploitation Meetings and processes.  Staff have been trained in and updated in relation to CSE and CCE.   
 
 
 

Positive Activities  
 
A range of activities are embedded within the service, there are regular activities during school holidays, and young people are supported to gain access to mainstream activities within the community. Examples include Summer Arts College, Operation Lifestyle and fishing competitions. YOS staff use these opportunities to teach new skills and to undertake informal social education as well as to talk directly about the reasons why young people are involved with the service.  
 
The Summer Arts College continues to be successful. Three programs took place during the plan.  These engaged 19 young people in the youth justice system, or at risk of becoming a first time entrant. It promoted team work, art skills, literacy and numeracy and engagement with education.  It provides the young people with the opportunity to experience arts and culture and access to local art provisions. Young people also achieved a recognised GCSE qualification. An additional shorter version of the programme was also delivered to an identified group of children in care with a focus on raising self-esteem and prevention from becoming involved in potential behaviour that may lead to offending. This has contributed to the continuing very low numbers of children in care who commit offences, this is consistently below comparators. 
 
Reduction of Substance Misuse  
  
The Youth Offending Service incorporating DELTA (substance use prevention, treatment and advice service) and its partners continued to be effective in reducing substance misuse through: 
 
• Direct work with young people to reduce substance use and risks associated with using substances 
• Working with professionals and carers to raise awareness and share tools to work with young people 
• Providing information and advice 
• Targeting provision on 'hidden harm' and education including the development and on-going work of the Hidden Harm project. 
• Recognising and assessing emotional and mental health issues and support 
• The Health Services Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool implemented for those young people who require a health assessment as part of their ongoing YOS involvement including young people leaving custody. 
• Early identification and intervention with young people regarding contraception and sexual health.  
 
The service ensures that parents are included in work and information is provided to ensure parents understand the issues relevant to substance misuse. The substance misuse panel work fits with the key elements of effective practice. The panel reviews the work on reducing and managing the use of substances and oversees progress.  
 
Further Developing the Partnership 
 
In 2018, the YOS further developed the fully integrated partnership approach and colocated with the Humberside Police Early Interventions Team, Children's Exploitation Intervention Team, Outreach Youth Support service and DELTA.  This provided additional opportunities for creative use of resources, partnership working and enhanced identification and interventions with young people. It also enabled packages of work that ensure the most appropriate professional is working with the child, building flexible approaches that utilise relationship based and solution focused models. 
 
The OPTIONS Programme 
 
The partnership has delivered the 'Options' programme aimed at reducing the likelihood of identified children entering the youth justice system through restorative approaches and information. 
 
The programme is a partnership led approach and includes the following key partners:- 
• Humberside Police Early Interventions Team 
• Youth Offending Service 
• DELTA - Drug and Alcohol intervention project 
• Children's Services  
• Schools  
 
It has been successful in reducing anti-social behaviour and offending and contributed to the continued reduction in first time entrants to youth justice. 
 
Reparation    
 
The YOS fully meets statutory requirements in relation to reparation and has continued to build and develop reparation projects and engagement. These include: 
• The 'Bike Project' which takes donated bicycles in various stages of repair. Young people are taught to dismantle, rub down, paint, repair and replace broken or worn out parts and re-build bicycles to a high standard. The project aims to build self-esteem and self-worth, teach new skills and help young people develop responsibility and achievement.  
• Other reparation work includes - maintaining the YOS allotment, delivering community hub leaflets, working to provide practical support to a local community centre, completing fire safety checks in urban green spaces, supporting food banks and a variety of painting and decorating projects.   
 
 
Reducing the use of and risks associated with Knife Crime 
 
The use of and incidents involving knives and other weapons continues to be low in North Lincolnshire. However, taking into account the national increase in knife crime and potential links to vulnerabilities through criminal exploitation, a pro-active approach has been taken to reduce both the use of knives and other weapons and the fear of these. 
 
This includes joint initiatives that focus on reducing knife crime such as 'Box Clever', positive community based activities and a developed understanding of children who are vulnerable to the use of knives. Partnership conferences have also taken place and initiatives delivered through the 'NoMoreKnives' campaign. Workshops are taking place in Secondary schools to educate children on the risks of knife crime and serious violence and targeted community projects in hotspot locations to engage children positively. Tools have been shared within the partnership and bespoke packages on intervention tailored on an individual basis in accordance with children's individual needs. Further development of immersive programmes of engagement and activities that focus on building self-esteem, relational work and desistance from antisocial behaviour and crime will also contribute to this. 
 
HMIP/JTAI Thematic Reports and North Lincs Youth Offending Service Response  
The findings and recommendations of thematic inspections are regularly reviewed within the YOS and updates provided to the Youth Offending Management Board. Learning is utilised to inform practice and development. Account is also taken of HMIP YOS inspections. This has included 
• The multi-agency response to children living with domestic abuse (JTAI) 
• Out-of-court disposal work in youth offending teams (HMIP/HMICFRS) 
• Protecting children from criminal exploitation, human trafficking and modern slavery: an addendum (JTAI) 
• The Work of Youth Offending Teams to Protect the Public (HMIP) 
 
Examples of actions taken as a result of reviewing these included: 
• Working with the staff team to build understanding of the impact of domestic abuse on children through accessing the local authority training, presentation to team meetings by local Domestic Abuse services, and the weekly colocation of the young people's IDVA/ISVA, to see young people and for staff consultation. 
• The out of court disposal processes and systems in place have been reviewed to strengthen the panel process and fully evidence the effective partnership working, further managers have evaluated cases and reviewed any reoffending over a two year period. 
• In relation to county lines and CCE the YOS continue to take an active role in the North Lincolnshire MACE, considering CCE in all cases and are proactive in ensuring referrals to the National Referral Mechanism are made where appropriate. 
• In relation to protecting the public, inspections found that YOTs were doing a good job, they were recommending that more YOTs should adopt a trauma informed practice approach. Trauma is fully considered and taken into account in work with young people in North Lincolnshire and support and advice is provided by the dedicated Child and Mental Health Service worker in the YOS.  In respect of the findings in relations to social media, it is clear that this a growing area of work, and training in respect of this is being developed.  
 
 
4. 	Key Developments for Continued Improvement 2019 - 2021 
 
These developments have been identified by the North Lincolnshire Youth Justice 
Partnership as key areas for continued improvement through review of the previous plan, the progress made, areas of challenge and the key themes the partnership has identified to continue the progress in reducing young people entering and remaining within the youth justice system. 
 
1. Continue to reduce offending and reoffending by enhancing opportunities for engagement through positive activities and opportunities. Delivering multi-agency programmes including art, activities and challenges that build self-esteem and resilience. Developing community based opportunities that are sustainable to promote aspirations. 
2. Reduce the identified factors that underpin the likelihood of anti-social behaviour and offending through further developing opportunities and support to promote engagement with education, employment and training through bespoke packages and support. 
3. Reduce the likelihood of offending as young people reach adulthood through reviewing and developing the partnership frameworks supporting young people during transitions as they become adults. 
4. Continue to build on partnership models of preventative work that focus on relational work with young people and their families utilising holistic approaches and focusing on the child within the context of their family and community.  
 
5.  	Structure and Governance 
  
The North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service (YOS) is part of the Children and Community Resilience area of the council. The Youth Offending Manager's direct line manager is the Head of Safeguarding Children who reports to the Director for Children and Community Resilience. 
 
Quality Assurance, Audit and Practice Development 
 
As part of the Children and Community Resilience area of the council, the North Lincolnshire 
Youth Offending Service reports into embedded Quality Assurance and Performance Management Systems. There are systematic and developed audit processes to ensure scrutiny and oversight that works towards continual improvement of quality and practice across the service.  
 
The Youth Offending Management Board 
 
The work of the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service is overseen and lead by the North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Management Board (YOMB). It interfaces with other statutory boards and strategic groups and provides information to the Children's MultiAgency Safeguarding and Resilience Board, Children and Community Resilience Senior Management Team and Community Safety Partnership. 
 
The Youth Offending Management Board meets quarterly with key partners contributing resources financially and in kind towards service delivery. The YOMB oversees strategic management, funding arrangements, partnership working and access to partner agency services. The YOMB receives quarterly performance reports and monitors staffing arrangements, generic workforce issues, budgets and specific projects. The YOMB monitors action plans and oversees policy, procedure, protocol development and signs off relevant partnership Service Level Agreements.  
 
The YOMB leads on and scrutinise progress in delivering the Youth Justice Plan, including board members taking lead responsibility for specific areas, scrutiny of performance and development, oversight of progress in relation to learning from inspections and key developments. The board provides challenge, oversight and support in the delivery of the plan and the youth offending partnership's key priorities. The board and its members are also active in supporting the delivery of youth offending services through agreeing actions to remove any barriers, joint approaches and clear lines of communication. 
 
The Youth Offending Service Manager reports quarterly and annually on the progress of the Youth Justice Plan, service issues, themes, challenges and new initiatives. The manager's report includes a budget update and any financial issues with budget implications for YOS expenditure. 
 
Table 1: Core Composition of the Youth Offending Management Board 
 
Name Agency  Status  Nick HamiltonRudd  Head of Humberside NPS (North and North East Lincolnshire LDU) Chairperson Supt Craig Scaife Superintendent Humberside Police  Board Member Ann-Marie Brierley  Head of Safeguarding Children  (NLC) Board member Darren Chaplin Head of Access and Inclusion (NLC) Board Member Stuart Minto   Head of Safer Neighbourhoods (NLC) Vice-Chairperson Helena Dent Health Services Commissioning (CCG) Board member Linda Bush Head of Innovation and Engagement (North East/Yorks & Humber), Youth Justice Board  Associate member Paul Cowling Head of North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service Board member John Lawrence Ongo Partnership Board Member Andrea 
Stansfield Humberside Fire and Rescue Service Board Member Claire Welford Engagement Officer (North Lincolnshire) Office of Police and Crime Commissioner Board Member Rebecca Greenfield  Executive Business Support Coordinator Administrator 6. Resources and Value for Money 
 
Value for Money   
 
The Youth Offending Service continues to achieve a balanced budget comprised in the main from Local Authority core funding and the Youth Justice Board Grant, supplemented by partner contributions and additional grant funding opportunities.  There is ongoing commitment from the Police and Crime Commissioner for 2019/20 to continue to support the work of the YOS in diverting from and preventing youth crime. This is allocated and overseen via the North Lincolnshire Community Safety Partnership.  
 
The Appropriate Adults service is delivered in-house in conjunction with interim arrangements with a neighbouring authority. All volunteers used to provide the AA service are trained to ensure they have the information and skills to provide an effective service and recruitment, induction and training into the service continues.  
 
The YOS works jointly with colleagues to identify alternative provision and prevent the need for children to be remanded to Youth Detention Accommodation. This means that there are options in place to provide suitable accommodation options for young people where it is deemed appropriate to do so. This includes immediate provision as a direct alternative to remand to custody.  
 
Impact and Outcomes  
 
The Youth Offending Service continues to invest in the workforce to deliver effective programmes that focus on reducing first time entrants, use of custody and reoffending.  There has been a continued reduction in all these areas and the shape of the workforce continues to develop to reflect this. Investments in early help continue to have a positive impact and contribute to the low number of custodial sentences and a continued fall in first time entrants to youth justice. 
 
 
Staff Resources and Workforce Development 
 
The YOS continues to benefit from a well-established partnership that includes a permanent core staff team that comprises a management team of Head of Service and two Operational Managers (all of whom are registered qualified social workers) and a practitioner team of Case Managers/Court Officers, Intervention workers, Youth Justice Panel coordinator, Victim Liaison Officer and a pool of volunteers.   
 
To ensure compliance with the minimum standards of the Crime and Disorder Act, in addition to the core staff, there are: 
• Seconded Education and Inclusion officer,  
• Substance misuse workers,  
• Dedicated health worker (Nurse) within the DELTA service 
• Allocated CAMHS worker 
• Seconded Police Officer 
• Seconded Probation Officer 
• Designated Social Worker  
• Dedicated Education Psychology time  
 
The team is also supported by a dedicated Operational Support team and information / performance team.  



7. Partnership arrangements 
 
The Youth Offending Service is a member of the Humberside MAPPA which is attended by the YOS manager and works closely with probation services, the police and partners to reduce offending. 
 
The YOS is represented on Anti-Social Behaviour (ASB) panels, is a core member of the Harmful Sexual Behaviour (HSB) Group at the HSB Panel strategic and practitioner levels and part of the Multi-Agency Child Exploitation (MACE) process. 
 
Partnership Arrangements and Activities Include: 
 
• Working with partners to identify alternatives to remand and more robust community bail packages 
• A custody pathway that concentrates planning for young people at the point of entry to custody and provides immediate input on release re ETE, Health, Substance misuse, accommodation and family relationships 
• Working with partners to support vulnerable groups including children in and leaving care, children who are unaccompanied and seeking asylum, children identified as having SEND. 
• Close links with the North Lincolnshire Fostering Service to identify alternative placements that avoid remands to custody, and provision of PACE beds.   
• Core membership and effective utilisation of the Harmful Sexual Behaviour Panel contributes to alternatives to young people being sentenced to custody. 
• The DELTA substance misuse service is an integral part of the YOS. 
 
Service Level Agreement and Partnership Arrangement Review Process 
To assure effective partnership working, Service Level Agreements (SLA) exist between the 
YOS and key partner agencies, including police, probation, CAMHS and Children's Services with emphasis on Looked After Children and substance misuse services. SLAs are subject to annual review and specify designated roles, accountabilities, responsibilities, recruitment processes, supervision, practice and delivery of services, and management of performance.   
 
Transition to adulthood  
 
The Youth Offending Service is committed to working with partners to ensure a smooth transition that addresses the welfare needs of young people and continued access to appropriate services and interventions wherever possible to manage older teenagers in the youth justice system.   
• Transition meetings take place for young people over 17 on orders extending beyond their 18th birthday, where transfer to adult services is deemed to better meet their needs, to ensure they receive appropriate continued support.  
• Probation services (NPS and CRC) have identified dedicated officers to manage the transitioning cases. 
 
Children in Custody 
 
Whilst there continue to be low numbers of children in custody, all children are allocated an interventions officer who works alongside the allocated worker. This includes compliance with statutory requirements and building a positive relationship with young people to support them when released from custody. This also ensures that they have additional welfare visits and facilitates where necessary the attendance of parents. 
 
Children are in care by virtue of being remanded into custody also benefit by having bail support packages drawn up jointly between YOS,  Children's Social Work Services and, where appropriate, partners in the IOM arena.  
 
8.  	Risks to Future Delivery 
 
Risk 	Action to Mitigate Risk  
National Guidance, review and 
legislation 
 
The potential impact of any legislative changes, the delivery of services to meet new requirements and the resulting impact on the service to ensure effective delivery.   
  
Managers to keep staff informed of any developments, including through the provision of written staff briefings, team meetings and training to prevent any challenges or risks as opportunities for development.  
 
To review and develop services in line with the ongoing responses to the Taylor review and national requirements. Potential Further Reductions in Funding 
 
Ongoing potential of further grant and core budget reductions in the next financial year. 
 
Community Safety Partnership funding allocation arrangements are progressing to a bidding process. As the partnership develops there is a risk that the funding may be repurposed for other activities in line with their CSP outcome based plan.  
  
Identify additional sources of funding through opportunities to bid in relation to key developments. 
 
Develop additional resources through joint initiatives with other services. 
 
Ensuring that services are kept up to date with progress regarding the process for making applications for CSP funding. 
 
Making applications in good time  Changes to the Co-hort  
 
Whilst in North Lincolnshire, the numbers of children entering the youth justice system continue to be low and there are wellestablished local frameworks embedded to address these, there are a small number of children with more complex needs who are vulnerable to offending and repeat offending including through exploitation.  
The YOS remains committed reducing first time entrants through prevention and concentrating resources on more intensive provision for the cohort whose offending is more entrenched and complex.   
 
Develop new models of working with adolescents, including development and expansion of opportunities to build community based positive activities and engagement.  
 Remands and Pressures on LA 
Placement Budgets  
 
North Lincolnshire has, in previous years, had a higher than average number of young people sentenced to and remanded into custody. Over the last 5 years this has significantly reduced. However, due to the small cohorts, there is a risk this may increase.  
There is a clear process, including the children's concordat for access to Remand and PACE beds when needed with immediate access to this when needed. 
 
Foster carers offering PACE beds, have received a briefing to assist them to fulfil the role effectively, selected foster carers are also undertaking Appropriate Adult training.    Appendix 1: Partner contributions to the youth offending partnership budget 2019/20 
 
Agency Staffing  Payments in kind - revenue (£) Other delegated funds (£) Total (£) Local Authority Education and 
Inclusion 
Officer 
 
Designated 
Social Worker 
 
Dedicated 
Education 
Psychology 
Hours 
 
Information / Performance analysis dedicated support  £267,000 £267,000 Humberside Police  Seconded 
Police Officer  Included within the CSP allocation Included within the 
CSP 
allocation National Probation Service 0.5 FTE 
Seconded 
Probation 
Officer  £5,000 £5,000 Health 
(CCG)  0.5 FTE 
Seconded CAMHS 
worker   
£16,405  
 
  
£16,405 
 
 Community Safety Partnership    £84,212 £84,212 YJB Good Practice Grant   £322,056 £322,056 Other 
LA Substance 
Misuse   £86,000 £86,000 Total   £780,673 £780,673  
. 


Appendix 2:  Delivery Plan  
 
North Lincolnshire Youth Offending Service 2019/20  Delivery Plan including the YJB Good Practice Grant indicative costs  
Core business activity includes: 
• Assessment, planning, interventions and supervision in line with the Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System 2019 ? 	Partnership work to reduce risks and vulnerabilities for children, the communities and victims of crime ? 	Recording, data analysis and effective use of information systems ? 	Communication with, support and services to victims of youth crime. 
• Ensuring compliance with court orders and sentences. 
• Reparation and unpaid work including developing creative opportunities 
• Working with partners and communities to improve inclusion for young people to reduce offending and anti-social behaviour. 
 
 
Developments for Continued improvement 
 
Priority Activity Indicative costs Continue to reduce offending and reoffending. Direct work with young people utilising desistance. 
Enhance and develop opportunities for engagement through positive activities and opportunities through delivering multi-agency programmes of art, activities and challenges that build self-esteem and resilience.  Develop community based opportunities that are sustainable to promote aspirations and inclusion. 
Review and build on the Immersive Aspirations Programme to engage young people in positive and sustainable community based activities with a focus on building self-esteem and engagement in EET. 
Develop further arts colleges targeting specific groups building on the successful Summer Arts College   
Develop DoE packages for children on the periphery of  offending   
£140,000 Build on partnership models of preventative work to continue the Review, develop and enhance the delivery of relational, holistic family based models of prevention in liaison with the FaSST, Outreach Youth Support and exploitation intervention services.  
Work with partners in communities to improve access to community resources using restorative approaches within the context of the child's family and community.  
 
£90,000 18 
 
reduction in First Time Entrants. Identify and work with partners to reduce offending through exploitation and contribute to awareness and training of staff, volunteers and partners in relation to child criminal exploitation. 
Continue to be an active participant in MACE in relation to both CSE and CCE 
Work as part of co-located services with partners, including the Police Early Intervention Team, to target resources to those children identified as at risk of anti-social behaviour and offending Reduce the 
identified factors that underpin the likelihood of antisocial behaviour and offending and the potential of receiving custodial sentences.  
  Support young people to prevent offending and develop creative alternatives to custodial sentences through further opportunities and support that promote engagement with education, employment and training through bespoke packages. 
Where young people are in custody provide support and work with the young person to reduce the likelihood of reoffending upon release including ensuring planned reintegration into the community, ensuring suitable accommodation and support into education, training and employment 
Continue to work with partners to reduce the use of youth detention accommodation 
Continue to work closely with colleagues in Education and Inclusion Services to build on and develop education, training and employment packages.  
£53,000 Reduce the 
likelihood of offending as young people reach adulthood. Provide bespoke interventions, direct work and support for young people as they approach adulthood in liaison with partners. 
Review and develop the partnership frameworks supporting young people during transitions as they become adults. 
 £20,000 Effective safeguarding Ensure staff continue to be trained and have the skills within the YOS to ensure safeguarding is effectively considered in all cases managed. Including: 
- Working within multi-agency framework to reduce the number of young people at risk of experiencing exploitation. 
- Ensuring safeguarding is considered as part of case audits and QA processes 
- Continue to contribute to strategic planning re exploitation 
- Monitor the implementation of the neglect graded care profile  
 £19,000  Total £322,000 19 
 





2 
 

2 
 



 







2 
 









2 
 

2 
 



2 
 

















2 
 

2 
 



2 
 

























