 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan  
 
 
2019/20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 
Forward 
 
As a relative newcomer to Northamptonshire, I have been very impressed with the absolute desire and passion shown by all staff, for the wellbeing of the young people they serve.  Achieving the very best outcomes is the key driver for our staff and services, and this is best achieved when we all work together.  
 
The Youth Offending Service is uniquely placed to enable professionals from many services to develop projects, plans, and interventions that help our young people to best effect.  
 
The YOS Management Board has representation from all the key agencies involved in youth justice work, and is determined that the service will continue to grow and support its young people. This year sees many changes for both the board and the services with the introduction of new standards and expectations, and in the changing landscape in the local authority .  
 
As a high performing service, we anticipate that the new inspection regime will be upon us in the next 12 months, and look forward to the opportunity to show that we will continue to put young people at the heart of our ambitions  
 
 
 
 
Sally Hodges 
Director for Children's Services & Chair of YOS Management Board 
 
 
 
 	 
Contents 
 
 
 
Forward	2 
Executive Summary	4 
Introduction - the past year	5 
Structure & Governance	7 
Resources & Value for Money	10 
Partnership Arrangements	13 
Performance against KPIs	20 
Risks to Delivery	25 
Summary of actions 2019/20	29 

 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
 	 	 
	Appendices 	 	31 
1. YOS Structure 	 	 
2. Staffing Charts 	 	 
3. Management Board approval 	 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 	 
Executive Summary 
 
The past year has seen a range of developments across Northamptonshire Youth Offending Service in relation to work in Court, with volunteers, training, hearing the voice of the child, and preparing for inspection.  The pace of development will not slow over the forthcoming year, rather the reverse. 
 
Work to reduce serious youth violence will increase, both in relation to knife-crime specific work, and the development of new services to widen our reach in partnership with the Police and the Police, Fire and Crime Commissioner's Office.  Greater alignment with Children's Services will be delivered as part of the development of the Integrated Adolescent Service, and work will continue to reduce the criminalisation of children in care. 
 
As with other public services, resourcing is tight but, provided there is no further reduction in year, services will be delivered in line with the plans set out.  The primary financial pressure on the partnership remains the costs associated with children remanded to youth detention accommodation and work is ongoing to address that. 
 
Partnerships across the youth justice system in Northamptonshire remain strong.  Following the announcements of both the Unitary Authorities, and the creation of the Children's Trust, work will be needed to ensure that the changing arrangements do not disrupt the essential activities.  The re-invigoration of the YOS Management Board should assist in ensuring a smooth transition to whatever hosting arrangements are agreed for NYOS. 
 
Performance against KPIs has broadly been good, but areas for further improvements have been identified, particularly in relation to re-offending and access to education, training, and employment.  Risks to delivery following from these and other potential issues are identified, and this plan concludes with the summary of planned actions for the year to come. 
 
 	 
Introduction - the past year 
 
 
2018/19 was another busy year for Northamptonshire Youth Offending Service: we have continued to build on previous developments, and been innovative and forward thinking in relation to issues facing young people today, despite the unanticipated departure of the Head of Service. 
 
Having worked with some of the most senior figures in criminal and youth justice, NYOS has secured approval for the approach to Youth Rehabilitation Order reviews.  The method effectively overcomes barriers that have prevented such initiatives across the country up to now and Lord Carlisle described NYOS as "an exemplar" in relation to this work.  With formal judicial permissions in place, and approval from the national players (the Youth Justice Board, the Association of YOT Managers, and the Magistrates Association), NYOS has developed a "starter pack" which is designed to allow YOTs and Magistrates' panels around the country to adopt what is now being described nationally as "the Northamptonshire Model".  
 
The model was presented at the Youth Justice Convention in November 2018, and the starter pack has been distributed to every YOT in England and Wales by the YJB and the AYM.  YOTs and Youth Magistrates around the country are now coming together to adopt our model.  The Centre for Justice Innovation is working with us to complete a small scale evaluation of the extent to which we engage with "problem solving approaches" in Court.  This includes both our work in Court and the YRO reviews. 
 
We remain an ASDAN customised accreditation centre, and continue to offer young people another alternative to educational achievement where skills are learnt and evidenced.  In 2018/19, NYOS continued to develop its in-house programmes for young people, including delivering effective group and individual interventions on masculinity and knife crime.  Over the past year, 23 young people have achieved ASDAN accreditation.  Having not achieved our target of at least 75 ASDAN accredited outcomes per year, we have developed ASDAN workshops for staff to provide the opportunity to discuss either work in progress, or how to get started. 
 
NYOS has again been successful in achieving the Investing in Volunteers award, which credits the service for recognising the value and impact of our Volunteers, who are embedded within our workforce.  Volunteers receive a highly effective training package that is recognised as evidence of best practice to ensure their understanding is of the same quality as paid staff.  
 
Three reports have been presented to the Management Board over the past year looking at disproportionality in relation to Black and Minority Ethnic young people,  Gender and Children's Social Care status (particularly children in care and children in need) and an action plan has been developed to address identified issues. 
 
NYOS continues to evidence a high level of compliance in ensuring that staff are regularly trained and implementing learning in safeguarding.  Over 90% of staff within the YOS have completed training on CSE, Prevent, Neglect and FGM.  We are currently exploring additional training on Adverse Childhood Experiences and Trauma Informed Practice.  A significant proportion of staff in the YOS have completed Signs of Safety training.  The learning from this training has already been adopted into our daily practice, both through supervision and in our approach to managing Risk of Serious Harm to others and the Safety and Wellbeing of children and young people.  This has enriched assessments and contributed to interagency understanding and communication. 
 
The YOS Youth Forum has recently been re-launched, providing a vehicle for consulting with children and young people who either are currently or have recently been in receipt of our services.  
 
There is a new HMI Probation Inspection regime in place, and we were fortunate to be able to welcome a representative of the YJB who facilitated a workshop for the YOS Management Board in relation to this and the new YJB Standards for children in the youth justice system.  This assisted partners to understand the developments in the framework, specifically the increased emphasis on the active contribution of partners to both governance and support. 
 
Throughout the year, NYOS has paid attention to HMIP reports on individual YOSs and Thematic inspections, factoring relevant findings into our own inspection preparations.  NYOS also completed a mock Inspection using the new HMIP framework during November 2018 and further mock inspections are planned.  NYOS also had one case in the national HMIP Resettlement Inspection, the final report for which has yet to be published.   
 
 
 
 
Liz Fowler & Cath Hickman 
Joint Heads of Service 
 
 	 
Structure & Governance 
 
 
Northamptonshire's YOS Management Board provides oversight, support, challenge, and strategic direction, not only to NYOS, but also to the wider youth justice system within the county.  Currently reviewing the Terms of Reference, the Board is going through a change process, which will see greater active involvement from Board members.   
 
The Board receives regular reports in relation to performance and finance, allowing it to actively oversee, support, and direct activity within NYOS.  It will also ensure that statutory partners are both meeting their financial and other obligations and working actively in support of the strategic aims in their day-to-day work. 
 
A major challenge for the Board over the next two years will be to ensure that the youth justice partnership remains effective whilst the County Council and seven Districts and Boroughs become two new Unitary Authorities.  Additionally, the Board must ensure effective implementation of the Youth Justice Board's 'Child first, offender second' policy approach as Children's Services in the county become a Children's Trust. 
 
The Board will set three strategic priorities each year, and for 2019/20, these are: 
 
• Reducing serious youth violence via the Knife Crime initiative and the Early Intervention Youth Fund 
• Ensuring engagement and alignment with the developing Integrated Adolescent Service 
• Reducing the criminalisation of children and young people in care. 
 
 
Reducing serious youth violence - knife crime initiative: 
Following the deaths of two young people in knife related violence and a recognised increase in the numbers of young people carrying knives, last year NYOS completed a review of our work with young people regarding the carrying of weapons to ensure that current practice is up-to-date and evidence led.  NYOS are now successfully implementing a knife crime programme for all tiers of young people coming to our attention, with the aim of improving their understanding of the risk of knife possession to further safeguard and protect our young people.  NYOS staff are also involved in the direct delivery of this programme in schools in the Northampton area and have trained teaching staff to provide follow up sessions.  Those young people completing the program within the YOS are eligible for ASDAN accreditation. 
 
 is the logo for this programme: it was 
developed and designed by a young person who very recently successfully completed their Referral Order.  Our ethos has been to engage with our young people both in the community, and custody as they live with these challenges on a sometimes daily basis and are best place to give us feedback on the interventions we will be delivering.  So far, the feedback has been extremely positive. 
 
NYOS was part of the judging team for the final of the County Schools Challenge on 8th July 2019, with this year's theme being knife crime.  Each school had been tasked to come up with ideas to try to tackle knife crime, which were delivered at a "Dragons Den" type event.  
 
On 26th September 2019 we have a launch event planned with the Northamptonshire Safeguarding Children Partnership as a major part of their inaugural conference.  This gives a welcome opportunity to share our programme with schools and others. 
 
 
Reducing serious youth violence - Early Intervention Youth Fund: 
The Office of the Police, Fire, and Crime Commissioner led a successful bid in late 2018 to the Home Office, under the Early Intervention Youth Fund stream.  NYOS is the major delivery partner for this initiative, which is being co-ordinated through CIRV, within the Police.   
 
The work of the Prevention and Diversion scheme (PaDs) has been extended to work with children and young people judged to be at high risk of becoming involved in serious violence, including involvement with gangs/county lines.  These children will not necessarily have committed an offence, and they will be referred to NYOS via the CIRV Triage process.   
 
Work has commenced on an enhanced approach to assessment and intervention with this group.  Taking account of trauma experienced, including the identified Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs), and resilience, the approach will aim to ensure that those young people receive the support they need in relation to the traumatic events experienced, alongside work to address the behaviour of concern.  Within NYOS, the intervention will be based on the principles of the Chimp Management model, developed by Professor Steve Peters. 
 
 
Engaging and aligning with the Integrated Adolescent Service: 
As part of the re-structuring of Children's Social Care, an Integrated Adolescent Service will be developed.  Although plans have yet to be drawn up, there is every reason to believe that this will become part of the Children's Trust when that is formed.  It is likely that this new service will incorporate not only the existing Targeted Support and Edge of Care services, but potentially the Youth Work team being put in place by the OPFCC.  Additionally, there will be Social Workers within the team to ensure that adolescents in need of a statutory assessment will not need to be moved to the wider safeguarding services.  It is hoped that, in addition, the specialist services responding to young people who are being exploited either criminally or sexually, the specialist sexually harmful behaviour will find a home here too. 
 
As a statutory partnership, NYOS will be aligned with, rather than integrated into this service.  The service design is currently being constructed, through significant consultation across the sector.  NYOS is already actively involved in this process, and this engagement will continue, to ensure that pathways between the two services are as smooth as possible, offering children and young people seamless access to the support that they most need. 
 
 
Reducing the criminalisation of children and young people in care: 
The national protocol on reducing the unnecessary criminalisation of looked-after children and care leavers was launched in November 2018.  The key purpose is to provide a framework for local agencies to co-develop arrangements to reduce this. 
 
Following a piece of work for the management board, NYOS reported that on 31st July 2018 we had a population of 72.5% with a social care legal status.  Of 102 open post court orders, 74 children and young people had a legal status of Child in Need, Child Protection, Children in Care, or Leaving Care.  This clearly showed a disproportionate number of young people with a legal status coming into contact with NYOS.  Those children and young people that were in Care or had become Care Leavers, made up 34.3% of the NYOS post court population.  However, as concerning and significant was the number of young people who were Children in Need: these accounted for 28.4% of the NYOS post court population.  
 
These findings fit with the national picture, that these young people are significantly over-represented within the system.  Ensuring that the circumstances leading to coming into the youth justice system are fully explored, and that they are diverted from the formal system wherever appropriate. Whether or not this is possible, a fully collaborative approach across agencies will be required both in delivering interventions and otherwise reducing the potential for them to return. 
 
 	 

Resources & Value for Money 
 
 
NYOS operates a Pooled Partnership budget.  This sits within NCC financial structures, but contains contributions from across the partnership.  Nevertheless, NYOS has complied with the spending control measures implemented by the County Council.  As host agency, NCC makes an additional contribution to infrastructure that cannot readily be quantified here.  The budget for 2019/20 is as below: 
 
YOS Budget Contributions 2018/19 Cash 2018/19 
Cash & Kind 2019/20 Cash 2019/20 
Cash & Kind Police and Crime Commissioner 200,900 420,900 200,900 420,900 Early Intervention Youth Fund (via PCC)     352,211 352,211 National Probation Service 5,000 34,154 5,000 34,154 NHS Northamptonshire   91,942   122,798 Local Authority 1,488,408 1,488,408 1,407,308 1,407,308 Youth Justice Board Good Practice Grant 553,915 553,915 548,699 548,699 Youth Justice Board - JAC Grant 25,015 25,015 24,779 24,779 Other (LA SMU) 80,000 80,000 80,000 80,000 Total  2,353,238 2,694,334 2,618,897 2,990,849  
The Local Authority funding has decreased from £1,488,408 to £1,407,308.  The overall Youth Justice Board contribution has decreased by a smaller reduction than anticipated, (£-5,452:  the Good Practice Grant by £-5,216 and the Junior Attendance Centre Grant by £-236.) 
 
The table above shows both financial and contributions in kind.  For 2019/20 the Police and Crime Commissioner provides the YOS with four seconded police officers plus a cash contribution, totalling £773,111.  Two community psychiatric nurses and two health and justice practitioners are seconded from the NHS, commissioned directly for the YOS, so the real contribution is £122,798.  
 
The YOS works across the county, with office bases in Northampton and Kettering.  Work is also undertaken in Partners' premises across the county, and via home visits, reflecting the rural nature of Northamptonshire. 
 
 
YJB Funding 
The YJB requires a breakdown providing details of how the YOS proposes to spend the grant for 2019/20.  The chart below shows this indicative budget, but as the YOS operates with a pooled budget from a variety of sources it must be noted that it is purely indicative.  The original legislation for YOTs had a principle that all agencies contribute to a pooled approach, and this needs to be borne in mind here. This relates solely to the YJB Good Practice Grant, as the grant for the Junior Attendance Centre is managed and accounted for separately. 
 
Priorities Areas for action Areas for spend Indicative costs 1 All children and young people grow up in a safe environment Reoffending - Custody -  
Remands -Accommodation - Violence - CSE ISS 
Courts 
Information 
Management 84,000 
72,000 
30,000 
5,000 2 All children and young people achieve their best in education, are ready for work and have skills for life ETE - Compliance/enforcement ETE 22,000 3 All children and young people grow up healthy, and have improved life chances First Time Entrants - Out of court -disposals - CAMHS Prevention  110,000 4 Improving outcomes for children and young people in care Monitoring/reporting to effect changes  Children in Care 
Supervision 
Management 30,000 5 Victims Restorative Justice - PCC Voice - Effective Practice - Police Reparation 
Referral Orders 
& Victim work 85,000 
111,000 Total   £549,000  
Included in the overall budget is the additional funding secured from the Ministry of Justice by the OPFCC, which is being used to directly fund a significant extension of the Prevention and Diversion Scheme within NYOS. 
 
The most significant financial pressure on the partnership over the past 12 months has been the costs associated with young people being remanded to Youth Detention Accommodation.  Funding for this is devolved from the Youth Custody Service to the County Council and the formula is based upon previous years' usage data.  Having had relatively low remand figures, these have risen lately, causing the pressure on budget set for a lower demand.  The budget for the current financial year is somewhat higher, but NYOS is also working with partners to put actions and processes in place to reduce the use of remands, not least because of the potentially detrimental effect on incarcerated children and young who subsequently do not receive a custodial sentence. 
 
NYOS is actively involved in and supportive of the national Youth Justice Workforce Development Council.  The Youth Justice Skills Matrix, which has been developed by the Council in partnership with Skills for Justice, identifies the core skills needed when working with young people who offend.  NYOS has used this and undertaken a service wide skills audit of all staff. The training needs analysis has been completed and an action plan will be developed and implemented in 2019 to ensure delivery against all core requirements. 
 
The current staffing structure of NYOS, along with the staff characteristics charts can be found in the appendices.  2018/19 saw a significant amount of recruitment across the service, in part due to new initiatives, such as the extension of PaDs under the Early Intervention Youth Fund.  Additionally, staff have benefitted from the high levels of training and developmental support provided by NYOS and a number have moved on to other organisations better able to meet financial aspirations. 
 
 
 
 	 

Partnership Arrangements 
 
 
NYOS is a statutory partnership, and the staff group is multi-disciplinary: effective partnership working is at the centre of the work, both with statutory partners, and with other individuals and agencies with whose work NYOS intersects. 
 
 
Children and young people 
NYOS have recently re-launched the Young People's Forum.  Three young people are currently involved in this (one girl and two boys) all of whom are currently working with NYOS.  The aim is to facilitate a forum of 10 young people who are either current or recently ex-clients of NYOS.  Membership of the forum provides an opportunity to have a voice in both current arrangements and proposed developments, and to participate in staff recruitment 
 
The forum is supported by a volunteer, who has received training for the role.  Whilst NYOS will provide support to the forum, the aim is for a level of independence.  Over the next year, the forum will be involved in working with NYOS to: 
• revise Referral Order paperwork and process 
• promote and encourage equality for young people  
• identify gaps in provisions  
• identify and address other issues of concern 
 
Additionally, NYOS hopes to work with the Forum to develop peer mentoring, forge links with other youth forums across the county, allowing the voice of children and young people involved in the criminal justice system to be heard alongside those of others in different circumstances. 
 
 
Children First Northamptonshire 
NYOS is hosted by Northamptonshire County Council and line managed within 
Children First Northamptonshire.  The Head of Service reports to the Assistant Director for Early Help, Safeguarding, and Children's Services.  In addition to being located within CFN, NYOS has a number of strategic and operational links across the Children's Services Directorate both in relation to individual children and young people, and in developing and maintaining practice arrangements.  This will remain critical following the YJBs clear statements that they are pursuing a 'Children first, offender second' approach. 
 
Work to implement the National Protocol on Reducing Unnecessary Criminalisation of Looked-After Children and Care Leavers is in the early stages of development.  Led by the Corporate Parenting Board Project officer, NYOS has been fully involved from the outset and has been able to provide links with police, CPS and the Probation Service to ensure that the development is appropriately multi-agency.  NYOS will continue to play a key role in this development, through sharing of good practice, utilising our nationally recognised restorative and diversionary approaches  to ensure that locally we  are providing an integrated, co-ordinated and pro-active response to preventing and addressing challenging behaviours of children in care. 
 
Last year, NYOS was closely involved with the development of the Joint Northamptonshire Protocol for the provision of Local Authority accommodation under PACE 1984 (PACE Transfer).  Having drafted the protocol that was adopted by the Safeguarding Children Board, NYOS is now centrally involved in facilitating the conversations between the Police Custody department, the MASH, and the Emergency Duty Team. 
 
 
Court 
NYOS continues to provide a high-level service to Youth and Crown Courts, and direct feedback on NYOS services from courts is invaluable in maintaining this standard.  Our Youth Court operation is currently being evaluated by the Centre for Justice Innovation as part of a pilot to support the development of "problem solving approaches" in three YOTs.  The feedback will be used through 2019/20, in discussion with Youth Magistrates, to further develop our Court work.  
 
NYOS has contributed to highlighting the need to improve the standard of advocacy for children in Youth and Crown Courts.  This has included making an agenda contribution as the only YOT represented at a meeting chaired by Charlie Taylor last year at the MoJ.  That meeting established a working group, to develop a plan to improve advocacy standards, and NYOS continues to play an advisory role in the efforts of the Solicitors Regulatory Authority and the Bar Standards Board to improve practice in representing children. 
 
 
Community Safeguarding and Public Protection Incidents. 
The CSPPI process is followed when a child or young person currently or recently known to the YOS: 
• Dies, is the victim of a rape, attempts suicide, or is the victim of sexual abuse/exploitation 
• Sustains a potentially life threatening injury, or serious and permanent impairment of health or development 
• Is charged with Murder, Manslaughter, Rape, or a Terrorism related offence 
• Is charged with a MAPPA Serious Further Offence whilst already subject to MAPPA arrangements 
 
Following the decision of the Youth Justice Board last year to devolve this work to local areas, the YOS Management board agreed to oversee the work in this area, receiving reports and agreeing action plans. Reports are produced following a thorough audit of the case and interviews with individuals both inside and outside the YOS.  The format expands upon that suggested by the YJB.  
 
Since these arrangements have been in place there have 4 CSPPIs, all of which have been related to Safeguarding. Three related to girls who reported having been raped to the Police, and one related to a boy who suffered multiple stab wounds and sustained life-altering injuries.  The reports in relation to two of the rapes have been submitted to the YOS Management Board and the resulting action plans approved.  The other two are due to be submitted to the YOS Management Board for discussion in October 2019. 
 
 
Health 
NYOS has long had the benefit of seconded Community Psychiatric Nurses assessing and intervening with clients.  Their work was divided between pre-Court, Mental Health Diversion, and at- and post-Court work with children and young people experiencing emotional distress, leaning difficulties and autistic spectrum disorders.  More recently, their work has been moved into the Liaison and Diversion team, changing the focus of their attention and work is ongoing to ensure that YOS clients receive the support that they need. 
 
Additionally, last year, NYOS worked with CAMHS to develop and deliver a Health and Justice project.  This aims to support decision making in PaDs by opening up opportunities for information sharing, as well as delivering low level interventions to young people within the cohort who are presenting with emotional/behavioural difficulties.  The two Health and Justice workers offer wellbeing assessments and interventions to young people, as well as consultations with staff to advise, and share resources and intervention. 
 
 
Education 
The availability of opportunities for young people above statutory school age has reduced over recent years, and statistical analysis of young people known to NYOS shows reduced educational outcomes in that group.  The role of the Education Team in NYOS is primarily to broker arrangements with other providers rather than teach directly.  Whilst NYOS is not and cannot offer significant teaching, there have long been arrangements in place with providers to bring educational opportunities into the YOS.  Currently those arrangements involve Northampton College. 
 
In recognition of this further reduction in availability, NYOS will explore the potential to further develop the currently available accredited ASDAN awards.  Work will also be undertaken with Northampton College to attempt to make the BTEC accredited Work skill Programme available to YOS clients. 
 
The proportion of YOS clients who are Children in Care and Care Leavers who have no education or other provision is even higher than that in the rest of the YOS post 16 cohort.  The recognition that additional challenges of engagement due to frequent moves and disruption exist within this group, makes it critical that NYOS works closely with Children's Social Care and providers to ensure improved transitions and outcomes. 
 
MAPPA & NSCB 
Having responsibilities in relation to Safeguarding and Public Protection, NYOS continues to be actively involved in both MAPPA and the NSCB, with a seat on both strategic Boards.  Additionally, NYOS is well represented at operational and subgroup meetings covering both agendas, and ensures that relevant staff receive ongoing training in relation to both of these critical areas of work. 
 
 
National Probation Service & BeNCH 
The Joint National Protocol for Transitions in England sets out the requirements of agencies in working with young people who attain the age of 18 during their involvement with Youth Offending Services.  The seconded Probation Officer is primarily responsible within the YOS for managing transitions of those young people who are assessed as suitable for transition to either NPS or BeNCH.  Locally, arrangements have been put in place, and involves front line managers from NPS and NYOS overseeing the decision making and subsequent processes in line with the Protocol. 
 
Transitions hinge on four key points identified in the protocol that are determined by the date at which the young person attains the age of 18.  As can be expected, the complexity of many cases means that the timing of these process points often needs to be flexible, and where there are significant delays, these are addressed in discussion with the two front line managers, and plans agreed to bring matters into line.  This level of liaison is proving effective, with good working relationships having been developed.  The area for development for this year will be to ensure that reviewing of the transition period is more effective to ensure improved collaborative working, allowing the transition of young adults to be seamless and supportive.  
 
 
Police - general 
The seconded Police Officers continue to play a vital role in NYOS; requiring them to   work with young people at the entry point to YOS, Community Resolution Disposal, through to those who subject to Detention and Training Orders and longer custodial sentences.  The role requires officers to undertake a range of specific duties 
• the Out of Court Disposal triage, outcome delivery and intervention 
• engage with young people who are assessed as high risk of re-offending and high risk of causing serious harm and MAPPA,  
• gather and share information in order for the YOS case manager to make sound assessments in terms of those risks,  
• deliver specific pieces of intervention such as knife, driving and violent crime programmes.  
Additionally, each officer is actively involved in initiatives focussing on NYOS development.   
• Two officers also run a cycle maintenance and restoration programme, Cyclopps, which has proven success as a prevention tool with local schools and adult offenders open to Integrated Offender Management intervention.  Over the next year we will be developing an accreditation route for participants in recognition of the work they complete in this community based project.  
• There are also 2 officers that have completed AIM 2 (sexual harmful behaviour assessment and intervention) training and both are now valued members of the AimToChange virtual team, supporting Case Managers to deliver specific interventions.  Over the next year, additional police officers will be receiving this training to develop the service that is delivered. 
• Following an internal YOS review in the summer of 2018 of the police officers role, officers have been identified to take a lead role in areas such as, Serious Organised Crime and Gangs.  The intention being that each of the four officers will have a 'specialism' to focus on and develop over the next 12 months.  
In addition to this, the YOS will focus on the development of being key partners within the CIRV triage allocation meetings to continue to support this project to ensure that young people in our county are protected and empowered to change problematic behaviours to reduce first time entrants into the criminal justice system. 
 
 
Police - Out of Court Disposals 
The Prevention and Diversion scheme, (PaDs), is managed by NYOS, in partnership with Northamptonshire Police.  Over the past year PaDs has received approximately 343 referrals from the Police.  Following triage, an outcome is agreed between the Police and NYOS, and this is delivered by NYOS Police Officers.  Assessment, brief intervention and an exit strategy follows.  This work is undertaken on a voluntary basis and the level of engagement from young people and their families is high, at 84%.  
   
PaDs staff also attend the Hate and Anti-Social Behaviour Forums across the county. This allows for open communication with partner agencies to ensure everyone is working together to manage risks in Northamptonshire's communities.  Over the next year, NYOS will continue to work with Police colleagues to maintain the high standards within this work. 
 
Following a successful bid by OPFCC to the Home Office under the Early Intervention Youth Fund, NYOS is in the process of significantly extending the work of PaDs.  This work is being undertaken alongside the Police CIRV (Community Initiative Reducing Violence) project to reduce violent crime and tackle the emerging concerns in relation to gang related offending.  Increasingly, intelligence from the Police in relation to serious youth violence has assisted in identifying emerging issues at an earlier stage, allowing NYOS to respond without unnecessarily criminalising additional children and young people. 
 
The project is in the early stages: having already developed referral routes, NYOS is now in the process of developing a new assessment framework, which incorporates the short-form AssetPlus.  The outcome will be used to channel young people into one of three pathways, depending on the type and level of need.  In addition, new delivery methods will be created, focusing on trauma, and building resilience with young people.  This work this is heavily influenced by the work of Professor Steve Peters, the Consultant Psychiatrist who created the  Chimp Paradox.  The main purpose of this project is to identify and support those young people who are presenting with behaviours and circumstances indicative of the potential for criminal exploitation and the consequent involvement in violence. 
 
 
Police, Fire and Crime Commissioner  
In 2018, NYOS supported the OPFCC during their Time 2 Listen consultation.  This consultation with young people focussed on hearing their experience of the Criminal Justice System.  Contributions were also taken from those who designed parts of the system, members of the public who have been through it, and those who work on the frontline within it.  The report continues to inform the practice of NYOS. This positive relationship will continue into 2019/20, working collaboratively to enable voice of the child to be heard and to enable positive change to services for young people.   
 
 
Restorative Justice 
Restorative approaches remain critical to the work of NYOS, both in relation to our work with young people and the victims of their offences, and in the ways we work together internally and with external colleagues.  The work in support of becoming a fully restorative organisation continues, and will do so for the foreseeable future. 
 
Under the Victims Code of Practice, NYOS has specific duties in relation to identifiable victims: to make contact with a view to offering the potential for restorative processes to be put in place; and to keep victims who wish it updated on the situation and progress of the young person.  This work sits predominantly within the Restorative Justice Team, with the Prevention and Diversion scheme undertaking their own Victim/Restorative work. 
 
In October 2018, the Ministry of Justice and Youth Justice Board released new Guidance re-affirming the underlying principles of Referral Orders to reflect the recommendations arising from  
• HMI Probation's Thematic Inspection - 'Referral Orders - Do they achieve their potential?' and  
• Charlie Taylor's Review of the Youth Justice System, as well as the findings of  
• the Lammy Review into the treatment of, and outcomes for BAME individuals in the Criminal Justice System.   
 
In response, NYOS has revised the Referral Order process to reflect these changes, refocusing on restoration, reparation and reintegration within the context of 'Child first, offender second'.   
 
 
 
Volunteers 
NYOS were successful in renewing their Investing in Volunteers award in 2018 and will  continue to invest in our Volunteers, in order for this to be achieved again in 
2021. There were 3 recommendations from the process in 2018; 
• Ongoing training with volunteers regarding Risk of Harm to others and the Safety and Wellbeing of children and young people.  NYOS has in place a plan to ensure that there is greater emphasis on this within the regular training plan.   
• Exploring how NYOS recruit volunteers from BAME groups. The RJ Team has taken the lead in looking at recruitment practice to attract members of the public from BAME groups. 
• A formal volunteer action plan that sets out volunteering objectives in one place and identifies how these link to wider organisational objectives. NYOS is working with the Volunteering Steering Group to produce this for implementation over the coming year. 
  	 

Performance against KPIs 
 
 
The YOS monitors national and local Key Performance Indicators (KPI's) to ensure the Service is making a positive impact.  The KPI's are as follows:  ? Re-offending rates 
• First Time Entrants into the youth justice system 
• Custody rates for young people 
• Engagement in Education, Training or Employment 
• Access to suitable accommodation for young people 
NYOS continues to make good progress with many of the indicators and will continue to mitigate risks and promote continuous improvement within the service.  
 
 
Re-offending Rates  
In terms of overall re-offending, NYOS performs well. The most recently published 
12-month reoffending data from the Police National Computer (PNC) for January - March 2017 sets Northamptonshire's binary performance (percentage of young people who go on to reoffend) at 37.4% . This compares favourably with the national average (40.9%) and East-Midlands average (39.4%). 
 
NYOS will continue to work closely with partners: Police, Northamptonshire County Council, National Probation Service, and local providers to exchange information, reduce risk, monitor outcomes and develop creative interventions to reduce reoffending.  This work includes young people both within and on the edge of the criminal justice system.  For example, NYOS is closely involved with the Community Initiative to Reduce Violence (CIRV), a Police-led project designed to reduce gang and other serious violence by offering an alternative pathway through mentoring, support, job opportunities and other change programmes.  It is such initiatives that will ensure NYOS continues to drive positive change and prevent re-offending in the future. 
 
Latest YJB Re-offending Cohort (Jan - Mar 2017). 
YOT Number in the cohort Number of reoffenders Number of reoffences Reoffences per reoffender Reoffences per offender % 
Reoffending Northamptonshire 326 122 408 3.34 1.25 37.4% Family Average 405.3 151.7 538.2 3.55 1.33 37.4% East Midlands 2491 982 3737 3.81 1.50 39.4% National 33364 13660 53470 3.91 1.60 40.9%  
Recently a piece of work was completed looking at the 2016/17 Reoffending Cohort, which identified a number of key findings, most notably in relation to a small number within the group that were responsible for a significant proportion of the reoffences committed.  The analysis identified that 6% of the cohort (20 young people) were responsible for 45% (172) of the re-offences.  A previous cohort from 2011/12 was similarly analysed and reported on in 2014, which also identified the same issue with 6% of the cohort responsible for 44% of the re-offences within the cohort.  
 
It is evident that there is an ongoing issue regarding a prolific few, and that if we are to reduce the local re-offending rate, this group need to be managed in a different way.  
The prolific 20 in the cohort have a number of shared characteristics:  
   • 75% are known to Children's Social Care 
   • 40% are Looked after Children Of those subject to YOS Assessment: 
   • 73% had dual concerns regarding both Substance Misuse and Mental Health 
   • 73% had speech, language and communication needs identified 
 
Where children are assessed as presenting a medium or above level of either risk of serious harm to others or safety and wellbeing concerns, they are then made subject to multi-agency Risk and Safety & Well-Being Panel arrangements.  There is no current arrangement to hold a panel solely based on the level of likelihood of offending alone. Of those within the prolific 20 that were subject to assessment by the YOS, all of them were assessed as high in relation to either risk of serious harm to others or safety and well-being, and none of the children were assessed as presenting below a medium level in either category.  These panels are also only in place for as long as the order is open to the YOS, but often the tracking of these young people carries on for a greater length than that of the order. 
 
These arrangements are multi-agency but deal with the case at an individual operational level, meaning that different workers attend different panels.  This does not allow us to understand and respond to this group as a complete cohort, which given the identified overlap in their needs and circumstances would have benefit and merit.  We therefore propose to establish a multi-agency panel.  This would enable management of the cohort to be considered at an organisational level; identifying and seeking solutions to any blockages or barriers to managing the group.  The group would monitor progress in relation to individual children in the cohort, whilst also addressing themes emerge.   
 
 
First Time Entrants 
The PNC measures FTE's per 100,000 population: an individual who receives their first substantive outcome, be that Caution or conviction for an offence.  
 
Performance from 2016 - 2018 shows FTE's continuing to reduce with figures of 257, 
220 and 213 per 100,000 population respectively. Northamptonshire's current rate of FTE (213) is below the England and Regional averages, but slightly above the family average. Whilst progress has been made, NYOS is fully committed to playing its part in managing this, for example utilising funding via the OPFCC to expand the Prevention and Diversion scheme (PaDs), ensuring that a larger number of young people receive effective interventions at the lowest safest level.  
 
 
*The YJB introduced new YOT Family groups in 2017, hence there is no comparable data for the YOS Family for 2016. 
 
 
Young People who receive a conviction in Court who are sentenced to custody. The National Custody measure uses a rate per 1,000 (10-17 years) population.  The most recent figures released are for the 12-month period April 2018 - March 2019.  The rate of 0.18 for this period is better than regional, national and family average.  
 
Data for 2018/19 show that 15 young people received custodial sentences in this period, a drop of 7 from the previous year. The effective multi-agency work with young people in the community, including the creative low-level PaDs and CIRV initiatives reduce the likelihood of further serious offending. Work is also under way to find a multi-agency response to the numbers of young people remanded to Youth Detention Accommodation. 
 
Custody Comparison per 1000 (10-17 years) population 
 

 
 
 
 
Engagement in Employment Training and Education (ETE) for Young People who offend. 
This reflects the proportion of young people who are actively engaged in suitable ETE when the disposal supervised by NYOS closes. Active engagement is defined as 25 or more hours for young people of school age, and 16 or more hours for those above statutory school age.  The local target is 80%.  Current Performance for Apr 2018 - March 2019 is 77.9%.  
 
Changes to local training provision for those above statutory school age have posed some risks to performance, and creative and collaborative work is needed to address these issues.  Gaining and sustaining training or employment is a critical protective factor, which promotes desistance for young people.   
 
NYOS invests in this area, funding tutors from Northampton College, and works closely with other local providers.  Accredited awards for Literacy and Maths are available through the College, along with more vocational input such as driving theory tests and CV preparation.  As an accreditation centre, NYOS offers ADSAN awards, and this provision will be expanded over the next year.  The potential to offer BTEC in work skills will also be explored.  
ETE OUTCOMES
 
 
Access to Suitable Accommodation for Young People in the Youth Justice System This local measure gives the percentage of young people at the end of Court Orders who are in satisfactory accommodation. This judgement is based on the Care Levers (England) Regulations 2010.  NYOS has consistently performed very well against this measure, achieving 99% in 2018/19 
 
The strategic landscape for accommodation provision remains challenging and NYOS continues to work hard to achieve the best outcomes for young people. The NYOS Accommodation team actively engages with Local Councils, Children's Services and the DWP, providing concentrated advocacy seeking to mitigate these broader risks. The team will increasingly be involved with the prevention of homelessness in order to provide greater stability for young people.  
 
Accommodation Outcomes 
99.0%
98.0%
97.0%
96.0%
95.0%Annual Outturn 16/17Annual Outturn 17/18Annual Outturn 2018/19 Satisfactory Accomodation100.0%98.9%99.0%	100.0%	100.0% 
 
 
 	 

Risks to Delivery 
 
Risk Seriousness Likelihood Action Success Criteria Co-owner/ Sponsor, alongside YOS Head of Service Performance 
reduction 
 
 
 
  
High  
Low Monitor performance, put in place corrective actions, support staff through training and supervision.  Liaise with partners and YOS Management Board to assist performance National Indicators 
maintained or improved 
 
Successful HMIP inspection result Sally Hodges 
Chair of YOS 
Management Board, 
DCS Increase in First 
Time Entrants (FTE) 
 
 
  
Medium  
Low Further encourage referrals to Out of Court Disposals interventions and those young people referred through CIRV at a more preventative level.   
 
Liaise closely with Police colleagues.  Report to YOS Management Board to monitor performance Continued reduction in First Time Entrants Nicci Marzek 
Director for Early 
Intervention, OPFCC Increase in reoffending with NYOS cohort 
 
 
 
  
 
Medium  
 
Medium Re-offending analysis to be completed for the YOS Management Board. 
 
Further analysis and profile to be completed on our top 20 re-offenders. 
 
Re-offending analysis to be completed again Re-offending rates reduce Sean Scannel 
Northants Police 
 
Introduce multi-agency panel to address common themes across the top 20 reoffender cohort Access to education, training and employment 
reduces 
  
Medium  
High Ensure educational staff within the YOS are ensuring the correct support is in place  and appropriately challenging tuition hours and availability of resources ETE rates static or increasing Fiona Baker, Lead 
Member, Children's 
Services Appropriate resources are not provided by partners, leading to worsening outcomes for children and young people  
High  
Medium YOS Management Board to monitor YOS 
data in relation to gaps in services or the need for additional support from our partners 
 
YOS Management Board to bring partners together for funding applications Performance improved and all appropriate resources in place Sally Hodges 
Chair of YOS 
Management Board, 
DCS Increase in gangs and serious youth violence, including 
the NYOS cohort 
  
High  
High Ensure this is on the YOS Management Board agenda and services are in place.  Data sharing is key between agencies and we have a co-ordinated programme of intervention 
 
Maintain positive links and referral routes  with CIRV Reduced serious youth 
violence 
 
Successful HMIP inspection result Mick Stamper 
Northants Police Poor Inspection outcome  
High  
Medium Mock inspection to be completed to 
benchmark progress made 
 Successful HMIP inspection result Sally Hodges 
Learning from inspection reports from other areas  
 
NS Audits / Self-assessment in 
September 2019 
 
Case file audits Chair of YOS 
Management Board, 
DCS Increase in young people remanded to Youth Detention 
Accommodation 
(YDA)  
 
  
 
High  
 
Medium Remand analysis to be completed for YOS Management Board, with recommendations 
 
Multi-agency approach to bail packages 
 
 Fewer young people 
being remanded to DA 
 
Reduced costs of remands for the Local 
Authority Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & 
Children's Services Young people within different BAME groups are represented in YOS cohort differently from general population  
High  
High Disproportionality action plan to be shared with the YOS Management Board and implemented  
 
 
 
 Targeted interventions developed Gordon King,  
Deputy Director 
Mental Health, NHFT Increase in the proportion of Children in Care and Care Leavers within the NYOS (post court population) showing  
High  
High Develop a framework with partners to prevent and unnecessarily criminalising already highly vulnerable children and 
young people where possible 
 
Review the national protocol and develop local arrangements to reduce Successful implementation of  shared local 
arrangements to reduce the unnecessary criminalisation of Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & 
Children's Services a high level of disproportionality the unnecessary criminalisation of looked-after children and care leavers  looked-after children and care leavers Disproportionate representation of girls in the pre-Court arena, and of boys in the post-Court arena   Statistical analysis an following actions 
 
Review of existing intervention packages and delivery approaches Sufficient packages differentiated by gender to meet individual need Denise Meylan 
Head of Northants 
LDU, NPS Resettlement from 
custody is not smooth and transition between 
services is fragmented   
High  
Medium Use of YJAF and attendance at sentence planning reviews and early release boards to ensure consistency of services with partners 
 Interventions and services remain in place for young people wherever they are at in the Criminal Justice 
System Kate North 
Deputy Director, 
BeNCH  
 
 	 

Summary of Actions 2019/20 
Area Action Co-owner/ Sponsor, alongside YOS Head of Service Disseminate good practice via the 'Northamptonshire model'. Provide support to other YOSs and Courts to implement the Model  Kate North, Deputy Director, BeNCH Actions in support of further development of problem solving approaches in Court To be agreed Kate North, Deputy Director, BeNCH Reduce remands to Youth Detention Accommodation Introduce multi-professional approach to designing and delivering Bail applications Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & Children's 
Services Improve educational attainment of YOS clients. Increase use of ASDAN and other accreditation across YOS client group Fiona Baker, Lead 
Member, Children's 
Services Improve educational attainment of YOS clients. Provide gold-standard service to children in care and care leavers Fiona Baker, Lead 
Member, Children's 
Services Directly address 
disproportionality in local Youth Justice System Implement Disproportionality Action Plan Sally Hodges, Chair of YOS Management Board, DCS Reduce serious youth violence Knife crime initiative Mick Stamper, Northants Police Reduce serious youth violence Early Intervention Youth Fund Nicci Marzec, Director for 
Early Intervention, 
OPFCC Increase alignment with Children's Services  Alignment with the proposed Integrated Adolescent Service Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & Children's 
Services Reduce the criminalisation of children in care Use of 10 point checklist, agreement and implementation of protocol Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & Children's 
Services Ensure that the voice of children in the youth justice system is heard, both individually and collectively Ensure that that the experience of YOS Forum members directly shapes the service, and in particular their views about what would have prevented them from offending. Gordon King, Deputy 
Director Mental Health, 
NHFT Improve collaborative working to ensure a seamless and supportive transition from YOS to NPS/CRC for young adults Review process and outcomes for those young people transitioned to NPS/CRC in 2018 & 2019.  Use data from systems alongside interviews with clients and staff to make judgements on compliance with the national protocol and consider improvements. 
 
Work with NPS to support their stated aim of establishing a dedicated team working with young adults.  Denise Meylan, Head of Northants LDU, NPS Ensure a stable and  suitably skilled workforce 
 Implement actions from the local 
Skills Audit 
 Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & Children's 
Services Ensure a stable and  suitably skilled workforce 
 Improve retention of staff, particularly those without vocational qualifications Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & Children's 
Services Ensure a stable and  suitably skilled workforce 
 Ensure actions arising from recent Investing In Volunteers award are implemented Jean Imray, Assistant 
Director, Early Help, 
Safeguarding & Children's 
Services  
 
 
 
 
 	 
Appendix 1 - YOS Structure 

 Area Manager - Operations Liz Fowler (0.5 fte)  
 
 
 
 	   	  
 	Development & Training 	  	Vacancy/Ross Watts   
 	 
 Area Manager - Specialisms  	Cath Hickman (0.5 fte) Prevention & Diversion Scheme  
Carly Muir  
  
 	Restorative Justice Team 
 	Interventions Team  	Gaye Arnold  	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Area Manager - Performance  	Mark Johnstone (agency) 
	Information Team 	 
Senior Performance & 
Systems Analyst x 2 
Audit & Quality Assurance  Worker  
 
 
 
 

 Area Manager (2 x 0.5 fte- Ross Watts) 	  
Appendix 2 - staffing charts 	 
 
These are standardised charts required by the YJB showing the full time equivalent staff complement broken down by gender, ethnicity and disability.   
 
B7: Staffing of the YOT by contract type 
Type of Contract Permanent     1 9 8.1 27 2.4 6     0 53.5 Fixed-term           7         0 7 Outsourced                     0 0 Temporary 1     1   3 0.2       0 5.2 Vacant       1   3   1     0 5 Secondee Children's Services                     0 0 Secondee Probation         0.9           0 0.9 Secondee Police           4         0 4 Secondee Health (Substance misuse)                     0 0 Secondee Health (Mental health)           4         0 4 Secondee Health (Physical health)                     0 0 Secondee Health (Speech/language)                     0 0 Other/Unspecified Secondee Health                     0 0 Secondee Education                     0 0 Secondee Connexions                     0 0 Secondee Other                     0 0 Total 1 0 1 11 9.0 48 2.6 7 0 0 0 79.6 Disabled (self-classified) 0.5 0 0.5 0 3.0 5 0.9 1 0 0 0 10.9  
 
B8: Staffing of the YOT by gender and ethnicity 
Ethnicity   M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F Asian         1 2             0 2     1 4 Black         3 3 1 1         0 0     4 4 Mixed         0 3             0 0     0 3 White   2 6 6 1
5 3
1 2 6         7 1
4     30 59 Any other ethnic group                         0 1     0 1 Not known                                 0 0 Total 0 2 6 6 1
9 3
9 3 7 0 0 0 0 7 1
7 0 0 35 71 Welsh Speakers 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
 
 
Appendix 3 - Management Board Approval 
 
 
This plan has been approved for submission to the Youth Justice Board and 
Northamptonshire County Council 
 
Name Position Signature Nick Adderley Chief Constable, Northants Police 	 Fiona Baker Cabinet Member for Children, Families & Education  Sally Hodges Director of Children's Services, Chair of YOS Management Board  Gordon King Deputy Director of Mental Health, NHFT  Nicci Marzec Director for Early Intervention, 
OPFCC  Denise Meylan  
Head of Northants LDU, NPS 
  Kate North  
Deputy Director, BeNCH CRC 
  
 
              Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                                        
	 	 	 	Page 34 of 
4 
 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 2 of 34 
 

 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 2 of 2 
 



 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 10 of 34 
 

 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 10 of 34 
 

 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 10 of 34 
 

 
                 Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20                                              Page 25 of 34 
 

 
                 Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20                                              Page 25 of 34 
 

 
                 Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20                                              Page 25 of 34 
 

 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 10 of 34 
 

 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 10 of 34 
 

 
 
                Northamptonshire Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 	 	                         
 	  	 	Page 10 of 34 
 







