Northumberland
County Council	
pushing


CONTENTS
1 . Foreword by Chair of the Youth Justice Board
2. Legal Framework
3. Review of Youth Justice Plan 2018-2019
4. Structures and Governance
5. Resources and Value for Money 6. Partnerships Arrangements 7. Risks to Future Delivery
8. Key Priorities for 2019-2021
9. Achievements - what young people say about us

The information, statistics and figures on which this plan was devised were extracted from the 'YDS for England and Wales Apr 18 - Mar 19' and were derived from the most recent data available at the time of writing. Any claims herein are therefore representative only of the information provided within the YDS, and not necessarily a true reflection of Northumberland Youth Justice Service (NYJS) at the time of publification.

I have pleasure in presenting the Youth Justice Service Plan for 2019 - 2021 from
Northumberland Youth Justice Service (YJS). The submitted plan is part of the grant conditions and part of Northumberland's continued commitment to keep the Youth Justice Board, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation, Board Members, partner agencies and employees, as well as the general public, up to date with the work of the team.
This strategic plan provides an update on the
Key Priorities set for the statutory Y JS for 2019-2021 and informs on the progress and successes achieved during the last year. The Youth Justice Plan, alongside the
Northumberland County Council Children and
Young People's Plan and SEND Strategy for 2018-2019 looks forward to how, with partners, the team will continue to deliver improved outcomes for young people throughout Northumberland. We will help to divert them from offending behaviour by providing better opportunities to improve their academic achievements, to care for their emotional and physical health, and to provide fair access to resources and services to reduce poverty and keep them safe.
people and their families to ensure that services and support arrangements for children and young people with special educational needs and disabilities are of the highest quality and have the maximum impact.
In a recent survey open to all young people in
Northumberland aged 1 1-21 , when asked "What is most important to you?" , "Safety" was chosen as one of six top priorities for the council to focus on as part of Children & Young People's Plan (CYPP) 2019.
When young people are telling us they are concerned with safety, we have a responsibility to ensure that all strategies are cohesive and integrate in a way that keeps the voice of young people at the centre of future plans and practice. The Youth Justice Plan 2019 - 2021 outlines our vision for doing so.

Cath McEvoy-Carr
QQ Executive Director of Adult Social Care and Children's
Services
Local Authorities have a statutory duty to submit an annual Youth Justice Plan relating to their provision of Youth Justice services.Northumberland Y JS is a statutory multi-agency partnership which includes:
• Northumberland County Council.
• Northumbria Police.
• National Probation.
• Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS.

Section 40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 sets out the youth offending partnership's responsibilities in producing a plan. It states that it is the duty of each Local Authority, after consultation with partner agencies, to formulate and implement an annual Youth Justice Plan, setting out:
• How youth justice services in their area are to be provided and funded
• How the youth offending team (YO T) or equivalent service will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out.
This year we have decided to submit a 2-year plan to embed the current and future priority areas.
The Y JS continues to review its performance in relation to the following national reporting outcomes:• Reduction in the rate of first time entrants
(FTE)
• Reduction in the rate of re-offending.  Reduction in the rate of custody.
2018-2019 YJP
The Youth Justice Plan 2018-2019 covered the following areas:
• To develop a re-offending action plan.  To bid for further funding from NHS England to continue with the Liaison and Diversion scheme.  To provide interventions in 50% of Community Resolution Cases.
• To develop more bespoke intervention programmes.
• To continue work on trauma based practice.
• To develop an Integrated Offender Management Model with Northumbria Police.
• To increase victim participation and satisfaction in restorative process.
These areas are covered throughout the document in the key priorities and the progress we have made.
The feedback was positive with regard to the colocation of NAS and clear multi-agency working between YJS, care leavers, SORTED, Youth and accommodation services. It was found good flow of information between NAS, MASH, social work locality teams and the Police. The JTAI found the YJS provides a 'rich' offer of Out-Of-Court disposals that divert young people away from the criminal justice system. In terms of areas of development it was acknowledged that Criminal Exploitation is not comprehensively understood by practitioners in all agencies across the partnership. The YJS is commissioning training from the Children Society to address these issues.
This Youth Justice Plan acknowledges the work of the last HMIP thematic reports for Youth Justice, which was published in March 2018 (The Out-OfCourt work in Youth Offending Teams 2018).

WHERE WE STAND
Our reporting on First Time Entrants, continues to show that we are performing well and that we are actively working towards a reduction in First Time Entrants.
FTE are measured at a rate of per 100,000 people, on a rolling 12 month period, restarting each quarter.
Northumberland YJS rate of FTE in the period Jan '18 Dec '18 stood at 336. In comparison, the quarterly update prior (Oct '17 - Sep '18) stood at 335. This represents a small increase at the rate of —1 FTE per 100,000 people in the quarter.
 However, in the comparative period 12 months prior (Jan '17 - Dec '17), FTE stood at 355. When compared with the figure for 2018, this demonstrates an actual year-on-year reduction of 5.3% FTE.
LOCAL VS. REGIONAL ANALYSIS
As demonstrated below, the rate of FTE per 100,000 people for Northumberland YJS (dark blue) is broadly in line with the regional rate for the North East (light blue) for the current period.
400
300
200
100

WHAT WE HAVE DONE
• Offered Voluntary Interventions following Community Resolutions and Triage to young people assessed as at risk of offending, or who are presenting with unmet or hidden health needs (47.7% of cases)
• Provided a minimum of a further two offence focused and diversionary activities within the South East of the Region at our Health and Justice Centre. The re-offending rate for those young people who have attended is 15%
• Early Intervention, targeting young people through Community Safety; Liaison and Diversion and MASH arrangements those young people who are coming into contact with the Police
  Utilised and extended our Liaison and Diversion  contract with the new contract providers Northumberland and Tyne and Wear Health Care
Trust (NTW) until sept 2019
HOWEVER
The FTE rate remains a key area for NYJS as our rate is still above the national average and we would like to reduce this rate in line with the national average of 236.
WHAT WE AIM TO DO
• To work in Partnership with the North of Tyne Youth Justice Services and Northumbria Police to develop an Out of Court Panel Process - based on the Leeds model - to provide a consistent and targeted approach to reducing FTE
• To develop within the Out of Court Framework, Outcome 22 ( deferred sentencing until the young person has agreed to engage in an intervention or activity)
• We will also work in partnership with Northumbria
Police, The Crown Prosecution Service and Children's Services delivering the National Protocol on Decriminalising young people in the Care System
• Consider how to roll out the Health and Justice Provision across other localities within Northumberland with our partners in the voluntary sector
• Consider how we embed the learning from the four year Liaison and Diversion contract into standard Youth Justice provision and work in partnership with the current contract providers (NTW)
• Continue to work with our partners in the provision of the Police and Crime Commissioner's Youth Endowment Fund to identify and support those young people at risk of serious and gang related crime.

3407%

 Our current rate of re-offending stands at 34.7%, down from 55% in the comparative period.
60
40
20

	QI 2016	QI 2017
Northumberland YJS Re-offending rate fell significantly, in the most recent available data periods from 2016-2017, dropping below both Regional and National rates per 100,000 people.
WHAT WE HAVE DONE
We created a specific Re-Offending Action plan, which included the following actions:
• Audit of a re-offending Cohort to inform the Reoffending Action Plan
• The development of an Integrated Offending
Management Model (IOM)
Review of Intervention Programmes for those young people who re-offended to identify what "worked" or "did not work" in order to create bespoke intervention plans.
• Tailored and Creative Intervention plans which build upon our knowledge of Trauma Recovery model; Adverse Childhood Experiences and communication difficulties
• Review of our Out of Court Process and agreement with partners of the adoption of a new model of delivery (Leeds model)
• Whole service approach to training to include Local Authority social workers, panel members and youth workers around emerging themes of Trauma Based Practice and Child Sexual Exploitation and Child Developmental issues.
• Secondment of a part-time Speech and Language Therapist
• Developed a Pilot with Adult Education and Careers to target in the Central locality, school leavers who have no destination alongside identifying those young people open to the Service who continue to be NEET to offer them employment coaches or allocation of a targeted careers advisor.
• Through the screening of the Police Electronic Notification Youth (PENY), early allocation of a case manager prior to disposal or court appearance to, assess, plan, intervene and advocate at the earliest opportunity.

WHAT WE AIM TO DO
• Maintain and reduce our current Re-offending Rate below that of the National Average
• Assess and review the impact of IOM and how it has contributed to the reduction in re-offending
• Continue to be creative and encourage staff to build desistance factors into bespoke Programme Planning and seek to develop opportunities with partners and voluntary agencies
• Develop and embed a new Out-of-Court Panel
Process including the new Outcome 22 (deferred sentencing until the young person has engaged in an intervention or activity)
• Complete a Training Needs Analysis within the Service to identify knowledge gaps and build on current understanding around health, educational, learning and environmental vulnerabilities, i.e. CSE, Criminal Exploitation and SEND
• Create a "Health Hub within Northumberland Adolescent Service, so that there is a multidisciplinary consultation for staff working with young people with complex and comorbidity healtl issues.
• Maintain our current profile of ensuring that over 94% of young people are in suitable accommodation
• Appoint a mental health nurse to build upon the current consultation provision (Health Hub) we have in place with CYPS, Speech and Language, and Adult Mental Health
• Increase our current EET rate from 58.5% to 65% by creating a specific Education, Employment and Training plan and building on the learning from thi Central Pilot
• Review the impact of the Speech and Language Therapist (SALT) Secondment and ensure that all staff can rate themselves as having improved confidence in identifying and working with young people who have communication difficulties.

WHAT WE HAVE DONE
• We have maintained a low rate for the use of custody in Northumberland. The rate is 0.11%per 1000 of the 10-17 year old population.
• We have consulted with our colleagues in the Secure and Welfare Estates to purchase a bespoke PACE bed within travel distance for young people who are denied Police Bail. This will be a National Registered Section 38 PACE bed available to all young people within Northumbria Police Force jurisdiction at Kyloe Secure Unit.
• We have delivered Appropriate Adult Training and reviewed our PACE form to ensure that AA are confident in their role and are able to identify SEND and communication difficulties and to challenge police decision making in respect of young people in care or young people who have been denied bail.
• We have continued to have good working relationships with our colleagues in the Crown Prosecution Service, Northumbria Police and across the five other local Youth Justice Services to ensure that we have a consistent and robust processes in place to reduce the use of custody.
• We requested and reviewed the feedback from Magistrates on the quality of our Pre- sentence reports to ensure that clear information and sentencing options was effective.
• We chair and attend the Heads of Youth Justice Meetings across the 6 Youth Justice Services and have invited our colleagues from Northumbria Police and Youth Magistrates to encourage professional challenge so that we improve our working practices across the Youth Justice Services.
0.11% per 1000 people
Rate of Re-offending
00/0

WHAT WE AIM TO DO
Maintain our low rate of custody.
Provide a PACE bed within travel distance for young people refused police bail.
To build a formal Review and Feedback process for the Youth Court (CPS/Magistrates/ legal) to ensure effective sharing of information and quality of court reports.
To deliver joint training with the CPS and Northumbria Police to our partners to improve understanding around the Decriminalisaion of Young people in care, vulnerable defendants and young people at risk of CSE and Criminal Exploitation who charged or summons to court.
WHAT WE TO DO
• Provide Victim contact in 90% of cases through a Victim Hub. We have achieved this. We have also had positive performance in relation to victims participating in a restorative process. The figures in the last four quarters have been 47%, 33%, 73% and 36%
• Retain our Restorative Justice Quality Mark, which we did.	
• Collate effective victim satisfaction feedback. We have appointed a Participation worker who will start in Sept 2019.
• Review the Youth Justice Service structure to ensure that it is cost effective meeting the challenges of providing services to a more complex but smaller cohort of vulnerable young people. We are currently going through a consultation period with our workforce.
Participate in Northumberland Adolescent Service Reviews/lnspections to ensure that we are effective in keeping young people safe in Northumberland. As discussed previously we have had a number of Reviews and and a JTAI inspection and the outcomes of these inspections have informed our priorities in keeping young people safe.
Continue to Chair and attend The Heads of Service for YJS in Northumbria, We meet on a bi monthly basis and are working on how to achieve a level of consistency across practice, policies and procedures across all areas. We continue to have regular communication with the YJB partnership advisor. Northumberland YOS attend and contribute to the regional executive meetings. At an operation level Northumberland YJS attend the YJB quarterly effective practice forum.

NUMBER OF YOUNG PEOPLE COMING
THROUGH THE YOUTH JUSTICE SYSTEM

358
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
400

Review the Youth Justice Service against the Youth Justice Board Principles (2019)
The principles of the Youth Justice Board (YJB) are:
1. Children First and Offender Second.
NYJS has actively promoted this Principle within the Service and our partnerships and this is reflected in the change to our name from Youth Offending Team to Youth Justice Service. Also in our Priorities is to deter and support young people out of and within the criminal justice system.
2. Prioritise the best interests of children, recognising their needs, capacities, rights and potential
We work to ensure that our workforce are capable and committed to providing the best service possible to our young people and their families and that we actively advocate and challenge our partners and stakeholders in promoting and delivering effective and expedient services.
3. Build on children's individual strengths and capabilities as a means of developing a pro-social identity for sustainable desistance from crime. This leads to safer communities and fewer victims. All work is constructive and future-focused, built on supportive relationships that empower children to fulfill their potential and make positive contributions to society
We are developing the provision of bespoke interventions and building partnerships with key educational and voluntary services.
4. Encourage children's active participation, engagement and wider social inclusion. All work is a meaningful collaboration with children and their carers
We have appointed a Participation worker for the Youth Justice Service to start September 2019
5. Promote a childhood removed from the justice system, using prevention, diversion and minimal intervention. All work minimises criminogenic stigma from contact with the system
We are developing a new out of court disposal framework with North of Tyne Youth Justice Services and Northumbria Police to include the new Outcome 22 (deferred sentencing)
Northumberland YJS embraces the National Protocol on Reducing Criminalisation of Looked After
Children (LAC) published in November 2018. Northumberland County Council will finalize its protocol later on this year after a number of work streams have concluded various pieces of work. In the last year the number of LAC who were subject to a caution or conviction was 2.3%. This is better than the North East average of 5% and England average of 4%.
                                                   services. The Youth Justice Board is headed by:

Dean JacksonSharron PearsonGraham ReiterService Director -Head of YouthService Director -Education & SkillsJustice ServiceChildren's Social                                                                      Care Along with the following partners:
Team Manager - Safeguarding, Northumberland County Council
Senior Practitioner, Northumberland County Council
Head of Housing, Public Protection, Northumberland County Council
Performance, Northumberland County Council
Designated Nurse for Looked After Children, Northumberland CCG Northumbria Police
Magistrate, Youth Court, North of Tyne Magistrates
Youth Justice Board
Probation Service
Northumberland Children and Young People's Service, Northumberland, Tyne & Wear NHS Foundation Trust
There is a clear focus on holding the functions of the Youth Justice Service, and the wider YJS partnership, to account for performance at both an operational and strategic level. All members have signed up to the Terms of Reference and meetings are quarterly. We have also now in place a job description for the role of Youth Justice Board member

MONITORING
The Northumberland Youth Justice Board has focussed particular attention this year, on our previous increased rate of re-offending, requesting reports on the profiles of prolific offenders and monitoring our Re-offending Action plan; Reports have also been shared on our First Time Entrants and the Out of Court Disposals process in light of the Thematic Inspection; Also the impact of the Health and Justice Centre, Restorative Justice and the quality of Pre-Sentence Reports.
MONITORING ATTENDANCE
The Chair of the YJS Board has also been proactive in encouraging the regular attendance of Health representative and the Police, which has enabled us to work more effectively on the development of our Health post and the Out Of Court process.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Devolution for the North of the Tyne and the combined authority has presented the Youth Justice Service with opportunities to support joint commissioning of services with our Youth Justice Neighbours. We have commissioned Appropriate
Adult Services and training from North Tyneside YJS. We are also working together to use the same assessment tool for Out-Of-Court disposals. We are consulting on how we could share Referral order panel members and attendance at the Youth Court. We have also continued to support and attend the Head of Youth Justice meeting, with North Tyneside; Newcastle; Gateshead, South Shields and Sunderland; providing updates to the YJB to support joint working across the 6 local authorities.
NATIONAL AND LOCAL THEMES
They have also been updated on National and Local emerging themes, such as Trauma Based Practice and Speech and Language impact on offending behaviour.
Locally, our arrangements for assessing and monitoring Child Sexual Exploitation through our MSET arrangements.
FUTURE STRUCTURE
Northumberland YJS are currently going through a consultation process to rescope the service to ensure that we are meeting the needs of our young people in the most cost-effective way.
• We have created a Participation Post as a result of the challenge that our services are not fully informed by the views of young people.
• Moving forward, any case worker with a social work degree will be placed on a social worker job description and, when appropriate, the Youth Justice Worker will perform the role of the Social worker.
• The review of our parenting post and education welfare post may result in these posts being deleted. We will continue with our colleagues in Early Help and within Education to provide support to parents and young people who have specific parenting and education needs.
This monitoring and challenge by the Youth Justice Board and subsequent actions has informed this year's annual plan.

The Northumberland Youth Justice Service budget 2019-20
Staffing CostsPayments in kindOther delegated fundsTotalPolicePolice and Crime Commissioner6,0006,000Probation5,0005,000Health44,00044,000Local Authority449,59050,850500,440Wales Assembly GovernmentYJB483,53054,700538,230OtherTotal982,1200111,550
We have discussed earlier in the document how our location within NAS supports our partnerships with Children's Services in respect of safeguarding our most vulnerable young people. The image below represents the strategic links we have with other partners
vertiCipatit•n
Help
H%lth and	tor wellbeing Youth VOTS
Offending Service
l.c•vétl
      	First pane'
MECHANISMS FOR REPORTING OR
ESCALATING HIGH RISK CASES
Any significant concerns or incidents are escalated by the Head of the Youth Justice Service to the Heads of
Service; Service Director; Executive Director and Chief
Executive. As our Executive Director is Chair of the Youth Justice Service Board, arrangements are in place to inform the Partnership Board of any concerns.
PARTNERSHIP
ARRANGEMENTS
OUR SPECIALIST SERVICES
Continue to be mainly provided in-house; such as Substance Misuse and Accommodation services and support from the Youth Service in delivering Diversionary activities.
Work in partnership with Northumbria Healthcare Trust in the provision of a seconded Speech and Language Therapist.
Have a weekly consultation clinic with Children &
Young People's Service (CYPS) worker from
Northumberland and Tyne and Wear Health Care Trust (NTW)
 Have access to seconded Supporting Families worker from the Department of Work and Pensions.
Have worked in partnership with Northumbria Police and NUFC in the provision of the YOLO Mentoring Project (Early Intervention Fund).
Continue to provide a Liaison and Diversion service on behalf of Northumberland and Tyne Wear Health Care Trust (NTW) until Sept 2019 when the transition arrangements will end.
Have effective working relationships with Northumberland Career Service and are developing a more effective relationship with
Northumberland's Special Educational Needs and Disabilities Service.

Northumberland YJS continues to function in an ever-evolving landscape, with a reduction in resources and the streamlining of services. We are now working with a group of young people that exhibit higher levels of need and more challenging behaviors. The YJB effective practice grant allows us to maintain comprehensive, robust and effective youth justice services against the three national key performance areas. If this grant were to be reduced substantially in the future, it would prove challenging to perform well against three indicators.

RISKS TO FUTURE

DELIVERY AGAINST

THE YOUTH

JUSTICE OUTCOME

MEASURES
We also face new challenges given our increased understanding of criminal and sexual exploitation. Northumberland has not been significantly affected by the increase of serious crime, including County Lines and knife crime in particular, but we need to have strong measures in place to tackle at the earliest opportunity these issues.
The National Probation Service currently second 1 Probation officer to the YJS. However a review of the funding formula is taking place and this could potentially see a reduction in Probation staff.
Our strategy will be to seek out opportunities to work with partners to secure possible funding to effectively deal with emerging new themes.

Priority 1 Staff development - Ensure all staff are equipped with the skills and knowledge to promote effective outcomes.
This will build upon the trauma training this year and ensure staff will be offered opportunities to engage in work around criminal and sexual exploitation. We need to continue to build confidence around speech and language issues. This will also include a training needs analysis to inform our training and workforce development
Priority 2 Reduce our FTE - We will target to reduce this to the equivalent or below the National Average. We will do this by ensuring we continue to offer a formal intervention in 50% of Community resolution and Triage cases. Northumberland YJS will also review our caution process and to work with Northumbria Police to incorporate the outcome 22 model of practice.
Priority 3 Assessments - Ensure that all YJS assessments/reviews of assessments are responsive to young person circumstances.
The YJS now have a clear audit process in place to monitor this and we need to ensure assessments are reviewed on in a more timely. All statutory cases will be audited.
ensure where possible ways to devise consistency of services and close working with North Tyneside YJS. This will build upon the initial work which has taken place. The work has included PSR feedback form, commissioning appropriate adult work and having a consistent Out-Of-Court assessment.
Priority 5 Voice of the Child - promote the active engagement of young people and parents/carers in YJS activity.
The YJS have use the self assessment in assetplus to primarily gain the views of young people. This is embedded into practice. Clearly we need to ensure young people inform service deliver. We aim to employ a participation worker in the near future and they will be tasked with developing a process so young people's voices inform our services.
Priority 6 Education I Training I Employment - to develop an action plan to ensure we consistently achieve 65% of our young people to be in suitable ETE. This target has proved problematic at times and we have recently fallen to a figure of 58%. If we can achieve a higher level of performance in this area it will impact positively on our re-offending rates.
Priority 7 Re offending Action Plan - Although our current re-offending rate is below the England and North east averages this is a recent improvement. We need to remain focused in sustaining this level of performance.
This area will build upon our work in developing more bespoke programmes, increasing direct Police work with high risk offenders and by ensuring our offending behavior programmes are relevant and engaging.
Priority 8 Restorative Justice- In line with the victims code of practice Northumberland YJS will continue to offer victims the opportunity to engage with the service.
Young people need to be challenged around the impact their behavior has on others and the community. Victim participation has been good however we have struggle to consistently gain victim feedback. The proposed introduction of Restorative Justice workers should allow us to improve on this level of performance.
Priority 9 Health hub - Northumberland YJS to create a health hub. We are in the process of recruiting an emotional health worker. The health hub will be within Northumberland Adolescent Service, so that there is a multi-disciplinary consultation for staff working with young people with complex and co-morbidity health issues. We need to ensure we are proactive so our young people access to appropriate health services

Image of bench after repair by young people.

Image of bench before repair by young people.
Priority 10 Reduce Criminalisation of LAC
Northumberland YJS to contribute to the final County Council protocol. The service will also deliver training including the 10 point checklist to staff and a range of partners. We will provide a link worker to the residential homes in Northumberland to support workers to avoid Police involvement.
WHAT YOUNG
PEOPLE SAY
ABOUT US
"The support has helped me loads, I now think about the consequences of my behaviour, and my behaviour is much better, I am able to keep myself safe."
YOUNG PERSON FROM THE PROGRAMME
MY OFFENCE AND MY VICTIM
As part of our Re-offending action plan we followed the advice and recommendations from the Youth Justice Board (and other relevant research) around managing female offenders and created a bespoke 6 week programme for a group of 6 female offenders. The group had committed a serious assault on another young person and uploaded the assault on social media. Pre-court allocation allowed the workers to have a more comprehensive assessment of the young girls' needs and therefore prepare and plan a more bespoke intervention before and following sentencing.
The research emphasized that identifying Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and creating a safe and positive environments and forming effective relationships for female offenders will be more beneficial in improving outcomes than an emphasis on the offence itself. So although offending behaviour was covered during this programme, it was not the focus. This was to reduce offending by improving the safety, understanding and opportunities for these young people; therefore giving them skills and confidence to make more informed and sustained choices.
Z.
 "l thought that I would be doing litter picking or something like that as a punishment and to look at what I have done makes me proud. I actually did something interesting that helps the museum, I am proud of what I have done and can't wait for my mother to see the work I did in a real museum. "
YOUNG PERSON WHO CLEANED AN
ARTIFACT FOR WOODHORN MUSEUM
For the Reparation element of their Referral Orders, we wanted the girls to develop skills and confidence and build a more positive engagement and outlook of their local area. We therefore developed a relationship with Tyne and Wear Museums and the girls completed their reparation at Woodhorn Museum Colliery in Ashington, archiving and cleaning the historical items and also talking to the older volunteers about their community. Some of the girls saw and heard about the memorabilia of Ashington's most famous son the Newcastle Footballer Jackie Millburn.
"The package put together by the service was very good and has been really positive. The reparation work carried out at Woodhorn Museum was excellent and the group were able to give something back to the community. I would like to think that this work could continue as the female group seemed to work well and to my knowledge have not re-offended over the last year. "
PANEL MEMBERS

	FEEDBACK FROM OTHER	"...makes me think more about my decisions. "
YOUNG PEOPLE
YOUNG PERSON
"Nice to be around positive people"
                             " I didn't realise what there was for me to do in the area" YOUNG PERSON
      YOUNG PERSON WHO USED PHOTOGRAPHY AS PART QQ OF THEIR ORDER TO DOCUMENT HOW ANTI-SOCIAL
BEHAVIOUR IMPACTS ON THEIR COMMUNITY.
"l don't know how it's helping
                   " "...helped us understand things and keep me it's just helping me. 	out of trouble. "'
YOUNG PERSON
YOUNG PERSON
FEEDBACK FROM PARENTS &"The service has definitely helped, she hasn't engaged in any fighting, she's stayed out of trouble and there has been no police involvement since the support from the Youth Offending Service. I am worried that without this support she could re-offend. "
QQ PARENT
CARERS
 "She thinks a lot more before she speaks and has less angry outbursts. I have seen only positive changes in her behaviour. There are still some moments where she has outbursts around going to school but any negative behaviour used to be 100 times worse than it is now. "
PARENT 00

"My daughter never complains about coming to appointments. She seems to really enjoy the sessions and enjoys having something to do. "
QQ PARENT
                                           "Yes! the service has made a big difference, O "Our needs were met,	is more confident and aware of what she has Lucy was brilliant and we	done wrong and the effects and consequences were listened too. "	this has on everyone involved. "
	PARENT	PARENT
DELIVERED WITH SUPPORT FROM
NHS
Northumberland, Tyne and Wear
NHS Foundation Trust
National
Probation
Service
OLtc€






PRIORITY 
REDUCTION IN THE RATE 



PRIORITY 
REDUCTION IN THE RATE 







