

Executive Summary

Youth Justice Services (YJS) in Nottinghamshire are made up of three multi-agency Locality Teams and a county wide Interventions team. The Service meets all the statutory requirements of a YJS as set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 and includes seconded staff from Police, Probation, Health, and Futures (Education, Training and Employment).  
The aims of the YJS are to:
• R educe the number of young people entering the criminal justice system;
• R educe the frequency and rate of reoffending by children and young people who are already within the youth justice system; and
• K eep the numbers of young people experiencing custody - either on remand or as a sentence of the court - to a minimum.
Over the last year, performance against these measures has varied with any under performance against national figures continuing to be scrutinised. 
• F irst time entrants to the youth justice system has reduced dramatically since 2008/9 and is currently falling below national average levels.
• R ates of re-offending and numbers of re-offences committed by re-offenders has reduced steadily since 2008/9, whilst there have been some local fluctuations, numbers are now comparable to similar local authorities.
• N umbers of young people remanded and sentenced to custody means that, both nationally and locally, fewer young people are experiencing a period of incarceration than was previously the case. Locally, the numbers of young people remanded/sentenced to custody has again fallen.
In addition to the multi-agency make-up of the teams, the Service works closely with partners and commissioned providers at a strategic and operational level to try and ensure that the needs of children and young people are met and to achieve its outcomes and aims.  The Board works with strategic partners to ensure that the health provision offered to young offenders provides them with equality of access, which the general population experiences and it will continue to work in a multi-disciplinary way to ensure that children are not criminalised or remanded unnecessarily. 
Nottinghamshire YJS has maintained its commitment to delivering crime prevention services and deliver a high-quality service in relation to crime prevention, outreach and detached services; thus, keeping a focus on reducing the numbers of First Time Entrants (FTE's). The Service links closely with the Troubled Families agenda and acts as the lead professional where the young person committing crime or antisocial behaviour meets the triggers to ensure that a holistic whole family approach.
The YJS continue to monitor activities via quality assurance and quality assurance processes are closely linked with those which are operating in other areas of Children's Services. Its quality management framework is reviewed to closely align with standards which have been adopted by HMI Probation to  ensure that  assessments, plans and work with children and young people remains of a high quality regardless of what stage they are at within the YJS.
Youth Justice Services (YJS) in Nottinghamshire are made up of three multi-agency Locality Teams and a county wide Interventions Team, which provides support with interventions to the locality teams, in addition to carrying out crime prevention and targeted detached youth work in areas where there is anti-social behaviour and deprivation.  The Service meets all the statutory requirements of a YJS as set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 and includes seconded staff from Police, Probation, Health, and Futures (Education, Training and Employment advisors).  
In addition to the multi-agency teams, the Service commissions specialist external providers from the voluntary, public and private sectors to help it deliver key statutory functions, such as substance misuse, reparation services, victim contact and appropriate adult work. The key aims of the YJS are to:
• r educe the number of young people entering the criminal justice system;
• r educe the frequency and rate of reoffending by children and young people who are already within the youth justice system; and
• k eep the numbers of young people experiencing custody - either on remand or as a sentence of the court - to a minimum.
IntroductionWorking closely with other teams, departments and partners is key to ensuring that every child has maximum access to available resources and opportunities to achieve the best  outcomes regardless of their place within the criminal justice system; as a child on the cusp of offending, or a young person in youth detention accommodation with numerous offences. The case manager will work with the child to tailor a programme individual to their needs to identify ways to build upon their strengths, develop their potential and identify strategies to reduce the negative factors in their life which may be pulling them into offending, or increasing the risk of harm to either themselves or the public.  
Whilst the YJS strives to keep the child or young person safe and free from harm and will work to improve their life outcomes, it cannot be forgotten that the young person has offended and has caused harm to individuals and communities through their actions.  Keeping individual victims and the public safe will therefore always remain an equal priority.  Ensuring that victims have a voice and feel listened to is also an important aspect of the work of the YJS and for that reason an independent organisation is used to deliver a service to the victims of youth crime. In accordance with the Victim's Code of Practice, victims who have provided consent  are contacted and offered the opportunity to participate with the youth justice process, being offered a range of restorative options in accordance with their wishes and needs.   




Service Delivery - SLCN 
To work with the Speech Language and Communication Need (SLCN) lead within the YJ to assist in developing a SLCN Strategy and Clinical Pathway
Develop YJ staff's skills and knowledge in relation to SLCNCompleted 
A Specialist Speech and Language Therapist commenced working with YJ in January 2019 and is providing consultation to staff on young people with assessed SLCNs. 
Staff are being upskilled in assessing young people for SLCN and, where there is an assessed need, given the knowledge to be able to adapt what they do.
A Clinical Pathway is being devised for use with young people within the YJS. Service Delivery - Health 
YJ to support the appointment of a clinical psychology post within CAMHS
A training and consultation model to be implemented within Nottinghamshire to enable workers to develop a better understanding of trauma, including the use of trauma informed practice and psychologically informed work to support young peopleCompleted 
A Clinical Psychologist was appointed in February 2019 to assist Nottinghamshire YJS to become more trauma informed. 
The 3 key aims of the work are; workers having a better understanding of trauma, being able to effectively support young people who have experienced trauma and to assist staff to develop and implement a trauma screening tool. Initial scoping out of the Service has been completed and training and consultations are due to commence imminently.Service Delivery - LAC prosecutions YJ to continue to actively promote the LAC prosecution protocol with partner agencies
Evaluate the impact of the protocol upon police call outs and prosecutionCompleted 
This has continued to be of interest to the local Youth Justice partnership Board and work has been underway to ensure that local protocols are aligned with protocols to reduce the offending behaviour of LAC nationally.
A specialist LAC Police Officer is due to be appointed for Nottinghamshire to enhance this area of work.Service Delivery - Junior Attendance 
Centres (JACs) 
Continue to review practice for the JACs', embedding best practice approachesCompleted 
JACs' continue to run across the county and are tailored to meet the needs of the specific young people who are attending at any given time. Support has been drawn from partners (e.g. Street Doctors, CGL etc) to ensure that what is being delivered is up to date and mirrors best practice. Tailoring interventions to address local and national concerns is viewed as an essential part of this work.Service Delivery - Victim Services and Restorative Justice relation to Referral Orders
To ensure the workforce are sufficiently equipped to ensure a more restorative approach is adopted for Referral OrdersCompleted 
Mandatory training took place with both YJ Staff and Community Panel Members; developing their skills in facilitating Referral Order Panels and reinforcing the principles of Restorative Justice. In line with the YJB Referral Order guidance, Referral Orders have become more inclusive adopting a more child centred approach to identifying relevant outcomes for that young person and what success looks like for them.Service delivery - Offenders as Victims Work with the Office of the PCC to further analyse this area of work as is requiredDiscontinued 
The YJS have not been called upon to contribute further to the work which was initially outlined by the OPCC.Service delivery - Addressing Harmful 
Sexual Behaviour 
To remain active within HSB panels and be part of the evaluation processCompleted 
YJ continue to play an integral part in HSB panels and attend every meeting. 
There was a review which reported to the local Safeguarding Children's Board in December 2018 which evidenced some progress in this area.Service delivery - Youth Violence Develop work streams, policies and procedures regarding the criminal exploitation of young people and issues associated with youth violence (e.g. knife crime)Ongoing
The YJ Service Manager has been instrumental in driving activity within NCC and YJ in relation to High Risk Youth Violence and Child Criminal Exploitation.
Work is ongoing in relation to work streams, policies and procedures which can support partnership working in relation to youth violence and Child Criminal Exploitation (CCE). Governance and Structure
Nottinghamshire Youth Justices Services (YJS) are part of the Local Authority's Children, Families and Cultural 
Services department. Line Management of the service flows up through the department to the Corporate Director for Children's Services. The activities of the YJS are monitored and directed by the Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Partnership Board, which is chaired by the Service Director for Youth, Families and Social Work. 
The Partnership Board meets on a quarterly basis with good attendance from all key partners who are represented at a senior level. In addition to statutory partners, Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Partnership Board also benefits from having representatives from Education, Commissioning (Accommodation), the Community Safety Partnership and the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioners (OPCC).   The Board reports to the Safer Nottinghamshire Board, which feeds into the Health and Wellbeing Board.
Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Partnership Board holds the YJS to account, ensuring that it meets it statutory aims of reducing first time entrants, reducing re-offending and reducing the numbers of young people experiencing custody or remand.
It does this by:
• R eceiving quarterly performance reports highlighting performance to date, identifying areas of opportunity and actively discussing potential risks to future performance,
• R eviewing every Concise Incident Report along with details of any subsequent progress made against actions set;
• R eceiving quality assurance reports on the work of teams, and by board members being actively involved in the quality assurance processes embedded within the YJS; thus, assisting in increasing the Boards understanding of the work of the YJS; 
• H aving regular service delivery updates from Locality Team Managers. When operational changes are being considered these are taken to the Board for scrutiny and consideration; enabling the Board to assist in considering any potential barriers which could impact upon performance or service delivery.
• A greeing and signing off improvement/action plans from Inspections/Thematic Inspection Reports and actively monitoring progress against these plans; 
• H aving a forward plan in place to ensure that the agenda of the Board is focused on strategic Youth Crime Issues which are specifically relevant to Nottinghamshire and have the potential to impact upon performance and resources;
• H olding partner agencies to account for any deficits in their operations or practice which is impacting upon the YJS and hindering effective multi-agency working.
There is consistent cross representation from the YJ Leadership Team at the Management Board. The Group Manager, Head of Service and Development Manager attend on a regular basis, providing an effective link into the Management Board and supporting effective service delivery. 
The terms of reference for the Board are attached at Appendix 1. 
Governance of the Youth Justice Service

Resources and Value for Money
The three multi-agency locality teams that form Nottinghamshire YJS cover the core activities of assessment and case management of young people involved in the Criminal Justice System, or on the edge of offending. There is also a county wide Interventions Team which provides support to the locality teams in delivering targeted interventions and crime prevention work, in addition to carrying out targeted detached youth work in areas where there is anti-social behaviour and deprivation. 
The Interventions Team also has responsibility for co ordinating the work of the Junior Attendance Centres (JAC) that operate at two sites across the locality; Courts and case managers continue to make good use of the JACs to address the needs of young people on Statutory Orders. The Service is making use of the JAC for the delivery of tailored 1-1 sessions e.g. knife crime, relationship work and to deliver interventions that address locally identified issues; ensuring that it is meeting the needs of Young People within Nottinghamshire. 
Nottinghamshire meets all the statutory requirements of a YJS, as set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, and includes seconded staff from Police, Probation, Health, and Futures (Education, Training and Employment advisors); exceeding minimum staffing requirements and assisting in a high level of service delivery against key youth justice outcomes.
Following a joint national review of partnership arrangements between Probation Trusts and YOTs, 
Nottinghamshire YJS saw a reduction from two to one Probation Officers seconded from NPS to work across the three locality teams. Conversely, Nottinghamshire YJS has experienced an increase in the number of Police staff available to YJ, with the recruitment of an additional PCSO, and the potential of additional resources being allocated in this area, to assist the service to meet its obligations in relation to Looked After Children (LAC). In addition to the three multi-agency teams, the YJS works closely with specialist external providers from the voluntary, public and private sectors who are commissioned to help deliver against key statutory functions, such as substance misuse, appropriate adult work, victim and reparation services.
Information around staffing and volunteers is attached in Appendix 2.
Nottinghamshire YJS is funded from a variety of funding streams; both direct monetary payments  and seconded staff. 
	 Agency	Staffing costs (£)	Payments in kind -  revenue (£)	Other delegated funds (£)	Total (£)
	Local Authority 	 	763,638	 	763,368
Local Authority -  
	120,000	 	 	120,000
Public Health
	Nottinghamshire Police 	78,000	59,038	 	137,038
Office of the Police and 
	 	109,000*	 	109,000*
Crime Commissioner
	National Probation Service	45,000	5,000	 	50,000
Clinical Commissioning 
	173,000	 	 	173,000
Group
	YJB Good Practice Grant	 	937,419	 	937,419
	Reserves	 	50,000	 	50,000
	Total	416,000	1,924,825	 	2,339,825
*This funding has been agreed pro rata for the first 6 months of the year and is subject to a review of all youth crime prevention services funded by the OPCC
The YJS receive services from Nottinghamshire County Council (NCC) in terms of infrastructure (e.g. 
accommodation) and assistance with quality and performance monitoring, IT, administration and business support.
Partnership Arrangements
As well as working closely with partners operationally to deliver its key objectives, the YJS engages with partners at a strategic level to ensure that youth issues are fully represented within Nottinghamshire's priorities. The Service Director responsible for Youth, Families and Social Work chairs the Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Partnership Board and the YJS is represented by the Early Help Group Manager on the Nottinghamshire Safeguarding Children's Board, the Safer Nottinghamshire Board and the Reducing Reoffending Board.  
The YJS engages with local partners around key crime priorities as these develop and links in with local Community Safety Partnerships.  There is YJS representation across all localities on Local Multi Agency Problem Solving (LMAPS)/Vulnerable Persons Panels (VPPs) to ensure that they can contribute to addressing local issues relating to crime and antisocial behaviour that include children and young people. There is also regular representation at MARAC, Missing Hotspots meetings and the Channel Panel to ensure that the needs of young people involved, or at risk of becoming involved, with the YJS are not overlooked.
Knife and weapon enabled crime in Nottinghamshire has seen an upward trend since 2015 which reflects, to some extent, national trends and concerns. Locally, a significant proportion of knife crime offenders were identified as being under 25 years of age and (in the period studied) 35% of offenders were found to be 18 years of age or under and nearly half of those were aged 16 or under. Additionally, 2018  saw the publication of several key national and local documents highlighting the growing concern around contextual safeguarding risks affecting children and young people. Nottinghamshire YJS has been instrumental in promoting the issue of contextual safeguarding across NCC and key partners and, understandably, tackling youth violence and Child Criminal Exploitation (CCE) has become a priority on a local level and YJS are co-leading in the conception of a 'High-Risk Youth Violence and Child Criminal Exploitation panel'. 
The panel is made up of senior managers from 
CSC, YJS, Police, District and Borough Councils, Health, Education and Barnardo's and is designed to promote early identification and management of those at risk of committing, or being a victim, of knife related or violent crime. The panel aims to maintain a strategic and operational oversight of High-Risk Youth Crime and CCE cases; providing assurances to members that the child is being effectively protected, 

Closer working relationships have also been formed in relation to Harmful Sexual Behaviour (HSB) with new joint working practices being introduced across Children and Family Services. Together with partners from Children's Social Care (CSC), the Police, Health and Educational Psychology, Multi Agency HSB Panels are now in place to ensure that all young people who are arrested or referred to the Police, CSC or the YJS with sexually abusive, or offending behaviour, are consistently assessed. Panels also ensure that there is early identification of appropriate intervention to manage and help reduce the risk and  provide a consistent and coherent approach to addressing HSB across services that can be monitored and evaluated.
Changes in service management structure in April 2019 saw all YJS teams switch to the management of a single Children's Service Manager. However, the YJS continue to work closely with the Family Service locality teams and where they are already engaged with a young person who is eligible for support under the Troubled Families Criteria, the YJ will remain the lead professional and co-ordinate an agreed plan of work and activities. Working in conjunction with the Family Service gives access to increased resources for the individual child and ensures that appropriate support can also be accessed for the wider family. 
Meaningful full-time engagement in Education, Training and Employment (ETE) remains one of the most significant protective factors to reduce reoffending for young people and qualified specialist advisers (seconded from Futures) provide a bespoke package of support for young people involved with the YJS who are not accessing full time ETE provision. The ETE team's policies and procedures are aligned with the wider NCC's Children Missing Education policy and they take an active role in the Vulnerable Children's Education Commissioning group, providing multi agency solutions in relation to the education provision of vulnerable groups. This area of work is also being considered by the YJ Partnership Board and YP excluded from school are one of the themes identified for attention as part of the quarterly YJ learning reviews and as part of the Board's forward plan.
A healthy lifestyle free from substances, exploitation, or unaddressed health needs drastically improve a young person's ability to integrate successfully into society and lead a law abiding and productive life as an adult. Thus, meeting the various health needs of young people is considered of high importance by the YJS.  Nottinghamshire YJS has the benefit of having a YJ nurse specialist, providing an opportunity to assess those young people who are hard to engage and have refused health assessments from other services. The YJ nurse specialist can also assist workers to address issues of safety and wellbeing 
by alerting case managers when young people have accessed emergency services. This provision also provides a direct link into health services to assist workers to identify and address issues associated with contextual safeguarding.
The YJS can make direct referrals to Head2Head to access emotional wellbeing and mental health services for young people and there are now established links with Change Grow Live (CGL), the recently commissioned provider of substance misuse services for young people. There are working agreements in place to help ensure that these partnerships are working effectively and there are good links between services to help overcome any barriers to joint working that may arise. 
Many of the young people who work with the 
YJS have some form of Speech, Language or 
Communication Need (SLCN). Whilst Nottinghamshire YJS routinely screen all young people on statutory orders using the Communicate screening tool; assisting in the identification of SLCN, this does not identify all SLCNs and, given the age of the young people, there is often a lack of specialist provision to address this need.   Nottinghamshire were part of a successful bid for funding for an NHS England Health and Justice CAMHS Transformation Innovation Project and, as a result, a Specialist Speech and Language Therapist (SLT) was recruited to work across both Nottinghamshire, City and County YJS. 
The SLT is providing consultation to staff on young people with assessed SLCNs and undertaking direct 1:1 work with young people with high levels of need or complexities (where clinically appropriate). Additionally, YJ staff are being upskilled in assessing all young people for SLCN and, where there is an identified need, being more able to adapt what they do and support these young people. Working alongside the wider speech and language therapy services, a SLCN Strategy and Clinical Pathway is also being developed. The YJS is also benefitting from the input of the SLT in relation to the development of interventions/information to enable YJ to deliver high quality interventions and meet the communication needs of young people.
Another joint City and County YJ initiative, is the establishment of a Clinical Psychologist post within Head2Head to focus on improving the care to young people who have experienced trauma. A Clinical Psychologist was appointed in February 2019 to assist Nottinghamshire YJS to become more trauma informed; supporting young people who are already in contact with the police and are at risk of continued, escalating offending behaviour. Implementing a training and consultation model the three key aims of the work is for; workers to have a better understanding of trauma, be able to effectively support young people who have experienced trauma and to assist Nottinghamshire YJS to develop and implement a screening tool in relation to trauma. It is envisaged that these developments will complement the REACh (Routine Enquiry into Adverse Childhood Experiences) training that is happening across Nottinghamshire County Council, working towards sustained practice changes across all services.
Nottinghamshire YJ Outreach and Interventions Team has a preventative agenda. Staff work evenings, weekends and holiday periods targeting group work interventions to young people aged 10-18 that have been identified by agencies as being at risk of, or involved in, ASB within their community. Using outreach and detached youth work they are working to divert young people into meaningful and sustainable activities; creating informal education opportunities; encouraging individuals to explore and develop alternative ways of thinking is also an important aspect of this work. The team have been working in partnership with various partners/agencies including the Police, ASB teams, Parish and District Councils, the Youth Service and voluntary agencies to ensure that their work is being focussed on areas within the community which are identified as having the greatest need. By drawing upon both the statutory and voluntary sectors this partnership working has succeeded in the YJS being able to access an increased variety of resources and interventions for both preventative and diversionary activities with young people.
Case Study  
Linking in with Street Games and Active Notts, intervention was targeted within a local area where 
there was an identified increase in anti-social behaviour. Up to 12 young people attended on a regular basis, engaging with youth workers and taking part in positive activities. Going forward workers are going to engage with the young people to explore what they would like to be happening within their area. This work will be in conjunction with some Artists who will be assisting the young people to express themselves and communicate what they would like long term for their community.The YJS commissions services to ensure effective delivery in relation to their appropriate adult services and obligations in relation to the victims of youth crime. Following a re-tendering process, the Appropriate Adult Service has been re commissioned by Nottinghamshire and Nottingham City YJS. The YJS also commissions a specialist provider, Remedi, to deliver its victim and reparation services and this contract will remain in place until 2023; this provides some stability in relation to the services that are being offered to the victims of youth crime within Nottinghamshire. Remedi have also assisted the YJS in reviewing the existing Referral Order processes, taking on an increased restorative approach and being more child focussed. They have also been 

actively involved in the Out of Court Disposal (OOCD) decision making processes, ensuring that the needs and wishes of the victim are not overlooked when considering the most appropriate outcome for a young person being considered for a Community Resolution or Youth Caution.
**Bircotes Graffitti / Urban Arts Project ; Nottinghamshire YJS partnership working


** Dependent upon counting rules applied some statistics may vary
Custodial remands / sentences
Performance Measure 
Notts current or projected  performance 2017/18Target/StatusFirst Time Entrants: Number per 100,000  of 10-17 population251The national average  (322)Re-offending- Binary (reported 3 months in arrears)27.2Lower than the national average (42.2)Re-offending - Frequency reoffences per offender (reported 
3 months in arrears)1.19Lower than the national average (3.79)Re-offending - Frequency reoffences per re-offender (reported 3 months in arrears)4.39Above the national average (3.79)Since 2009/10 there have been significant reductions in the number of young people experiencing a custodial remand or a custodial sentence within Nottinghamshire. Whilst last year saw a slight increase in the total number of young people being remanded / receiving a custodial sentence, this year's numbers have been reduced and both figures remain below the national average for custodial remands (20) / sentenced (15) per 100'000 of the population.


Nottinghamshire remains committed to ensuring that remand is only used for those young people where the level of risk is too great to manage them in the community. In 2018/19 all remands were felt to be appropriate and there were no remands due to a lack of suitable accommodation; as indicated, the number of young people remanded had fallen and remains lower than the national average. Managers continue to routinely review all remands, ensuring that they are both appropriate and unavoidable. Closer working relationships with CSC, and the timely sharing of information, also ensures that issues can be rectified in a timely manner to mitigate against any unnecessary remands to youth detention accommodation.
Bearing in mind the YJB's principle of "Child First, Offender Second"; in relation to the transition and re settlement of young people; it has been recognised that for this to be successful, transition must not simply adopt the narrow focus of YJS to NPS / Community Rehabilitation Company (CRC), or be viewed as a single one off event, but should be considered in the broader sense. Nottinghamshire YJS agree that constructive resettlement and transition should be recognised as a journey that a young person makes between different services. To support in the development of this work, resettlement and transitions leads have been designated within Nottinghamshire YJS to work with partners in CSC, Probation, CRC and health to produce clear and joint pathway plans to alleviate the current gaps in the transitional process for our most vulnerable young people. Pathways will focus on the key areas which include: housing, health, leaving care and LAC.
This work compliments the already enhanced level of service which Nottinghamshire provides  to children and young people in custody. Young people are visited by their case manager prior to, and outside of, formal review meetings. They are allocated an interventions worker and Education, Training and Employment (ETE) advisor, who will work with them alongside the case manager planning for their transition into the community; ensuring that, where possible, parents/ carers are fully involved in the  planning process. ETE advisor's co-ordinate the initial request, implementation and review of Education Health Care Plan's (EHCP) for young people in custody which ensures equality of access to appropriate educational provision whilst in custody and upon release into the community. Regular and consistent face to face visits between the YJS and the young person assists in establishing close working relationships with secure establishments and facilitates better planning.
As previously indicated, a change in practice across the police regarding Out of Court Disposals (OOCD) has resulted in increasing opportunities for YJS to engage with young people, prior to them entering the Criminal Justice System, and to facilitate diversionary interventions to those who have received lower level sanctions. This work appears to have had a positive impact upon FTE's and further work is being undertaken to build upon this progress; establishing better links with the Schools Police Officers and the Liaison and Diversion Team to enhance the preventative work that is taking place across the county with Children and Young People. The YJS meet with all young people referred by the Police where they are considering an OOCD;  this enables a detailed assessment to be completed to determine the most appropriate outcome/programme of intervention for that young person.
To keep a focus on reducing the number of young people entering the criminal justice system, the YJS continue to seek out opportunities to develop closer working practices with key partners to identify appropriate opportunities to engage young people within crime prevention activities. Over the past year the YJS has been instrumental in assisting with the coordination, and sharing of good practice, in delivering weapons interventions across the county with different organisations. Sharing relevant resources with partners such as the Youth Service, the Police and CSC has assisted in the delivery of knife crime intervention to a wider cohort of young people. Work is now underway to explore how YJ and other agencies can increase their engagement with the voluntary sector to jointly address the issue of youth violence and knife crime.
Whilst developments in all these areas are positive, it is expected that the promotion of multi-agency working and developing staff awareness will increase the level of demand placed upon resources aimed at crime prevention. A future risk to the YJS ability to deliver against this demand is the review of funding by the OPCC for all youth crime prevention services. Should there be a reduction in funding from the OPCC, the capacity of YJS  to continue to deliver the same level of crime prevention/diversionary intervention and to support targeted operations, where there could be an upward demand on services, will need to be re considered alongside current partnership working.
Nottinghamshire YJS worked closely with Nottingham 
City YJS, the Police, CSC and the Crown Prosecution Service to agree a local protocol regarding the behaviour management of children and young people who are Looked After. This has been communicated 
to the relevant partners/agencies and work is continuing to ensure that this is clearly understood and embedded within practice. This has continued to be of interest to the local YJ Partnership Board and work has been underway to ensure that local protocols are aligned with protocols to reduce the offending behaviour of LAC nationally.
The Interventions Team is targeting resources within Hostels and Residential Children's Homes across the county; providing intervention to some of our most vulnerable young people who are at a risk of getting involved in violent crime, and at a higher risk of offending and re-offending. Co delivering with the Youth Service, this work is currently proving the most challenging due to the voluntary nature of the work; however, the Service is aware that it has the potential to have a significant impact upon LAC and young people living in supported accommodation. This area of work is also being supported by the Police with the upcoming appointment of a specialist LAC Police Officer. This post will enhance the work carried out to reduce/prevent the criminalisation of LAC within Nottinghamshire; mirroring that which is in place within the City YJS, this post will be based within CSC, working closely with all partner agencies including YJ.
A further development  is the YJ service being successful in a joint bid with the Youth Service for funding to support youth crime prevention work in Nottinghamshire, from now until March 2021. This will enable the service to employ mentors to work out in the community during the evenings and weekends providing support for young people during and following their involvement with the YJS. In anticipation of a forthcoming inspection Nottinghamshire YJS has held a series of meetings to gather evidence to complete HMIP's self-assessment and form judgments on performance against the specified criteria.  The YJ Partnership Board met to complete the selfassessment, focussing on Organisational Delivery and the Governance and Leadership of the Service. Evidence against each criterion was gathered and a RAG rating was applied to identify the areas where performance was good, and where improvements could be made. Specific actions have been set which has formed the basis of an improvement plan specifically for the work of the Partnership Board. 
There has also been consultation with YJ practitioners and managers from across the service. Similarly, to what was completed at the YJ Partnership Board, an action plan to address areas identified for improvement has been set which will form part of a service wide improvement plan. This improvement plan will be shared with the YJ Partnership Board and the Service and form part of the agenda at the YJ Management Meetings where it will be actively reviewed/updated.
In the past year the case management of cases has been subject to quarterly audit which has covered both statutory and non-statutory cases. All audit results have fed into a quarterly report which has assisted in forming a performance improvement plan. Of the 54 cases audited, 88% had been rated 'overall' to be of Good or Outstanding quality. Whilst findings in all five assessed areas (Assessment and Reports, Planning, Delivery and Review of Intervention, Initial Outcomes and Management Oversight) overall, demonstrated consistently good practice across the Service, there continues to be working to develop areas where the Service believes there is room for improvement. In 30% of cases audited, planning was highlighted as requiring improvement. This is an area of service delivery which is subsequently being given increased focus by the YJ management team and staff. Quality Management Framework (QMF) in YJ is informed by recent practice within HMIP; as HMIPs inspection criteria has changed internal quality assurance tools have also been reviewed and updated. Closer alignment with more broadly recognised standards will provide the service with an understanding of how Nottinghamshire YJS is performing against the standards set out in Domain 2 and 3 of HMIPs Inspection Criteria; thus, highlighting areas where  performance could be improved so that timely action can be taken. 
As part of the YJS continual efforts to improve and learn from others, reviewing recommendations from HMIP inspection reports has been introduced as a standard agenda item as part of monthly management meetings to ensure that the YJS keep an active oversight or findings and recommendations from other YJS, as well as learning about the good practice of others. 
 

Action Plan for 2019/2020
	Actions	Who	When
FTEs 
YJ to work with the police and others to offer crime prevention/diversionary  intervention at the earliest opportunity.
 
YJ to continue to target crime prevention resources; areas of concern (ASB) are prioritised as 	April 2020
                                                                                          YJ Management Team part of detached outreach work.
To quality assure the OOCD assessment/decision making processes to ensure that outcomes are proportionate and there is a consistent approach to decision making.
Re offending 
To review practice in relation to young people who have re offended whilst subject to YJ supervision to improve service delivery and reduce re offending rates.
Analyse re-offending data to identify profiles, hot spots and trends. 	YJ Management Team	April 2020
For managers to implement case reviews for relevant young people who have re offended.
All relevant young people who have re offended to be invited to meet with a manager and be given an opportunity to provide feedback to the Service.
Service Delivery - Remands/Custodial Sentences
To build relationships with the Court to effectively challenge inappropriate sentence/remand decisions. To ensure accurate record keeping in relation to sentencing outcomes so that patterns/
                                                                                          YJ Management Team	April 2020 trends can be identified.
To ensure robust pathways/processes are in place to support young people upon their transition into the community/across services.
Quality Assurance 
For the YJS to identify key themes for its Quality Assurance work; to develop specific practice/ service delivery across the Service (e.g. those who have re offended, YP excluded from school, 
LAC). 	YJ Management Team	April 2020
A minimum of eight learning reviews to be completed across the year; relevant learning to be fully utilised across the Service and actions set to improve service delivery. 
Participation 
For the YJS to review and develop its processes for gathering young people's, view of the 
service.	Interventions Team 	April 2020
Manager
To regularly consult with young people, parents/carers to demonstrate that the YJS is responsive to their views and can improve their experience of the service.  
Service Delivery - Youth Violence and Child Criminal Exploitation 
YJ to continue to have a key role in developing multi agency approaches to tackling Youth Violence and CCE.
YJ to be represented at multi agency panels focussing on Youth Violence and be part of the 	YJ Management Team	April 2020 evaluation process. 
To have recruited YJ mentors to provide individual support to young people identified as requiring  a long term/enhanced level of support.
Disproportionality 
To ensure that services are tailored to meet the diverse needs of children/young people in 
contact with the YJS.	YJ Management Team	April 2020
To analyse available data to identify and report on disproportionality within Nottinghamshire YJS. To ensure that actions are set to respond to identified disproportionality concerns.
Service Delivery - SLCN 
All young people subject to an OOCD/Statutory Order to be screened for SLCN.	YJ Management Team	December 2020
To have an effective SLCN strategy and  clinical pathway embedded within the YJS. 

Service Delivery - Health 
To have developed trauma informed practices across YJ staff, team and service and to evaluate the impact of this. 
To have implemented a trauma screening tool for use with young people across the YJS.
YJ staff to be more able to effectively support young people who have experienced trauma.

YJ Management Team	December 2020

Appendix 1
Terms of Reference 
Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Board
1. Purpose of the Board
The purpose of the Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Board is to provide strategic oversight and direction to the Youth Offending Teams and to coordinate the provision of youth justice services by the Youth Offending Teams and partner organisations.
2. Status of the Board
The Board is made up of senior representatives of partner organisations.  It is the governance group for the Youth Offending Teams and acts on behalf of the County Council and partner organisations.  The Board reports to the Safer Nottinghamshire Board.
3. Aim of the Board
To ensure that the Youth Offending Teams:-
• p revent offending, thus reducing first time entrants to the Youth Offending Teams;
• r educe re-offending of those within the Youth Offending Teams;
• k eeps numbers of children and young people remanded into custody or sentenced to custody to a minimum;
• safeguard children and young people;
• protect the public from harm
4 Main Tasks of the Board:
• S et the strategic direction of the Youth Offending Teams and wider youth justice services via the agreement and review of strategic plans;
• E nsure that the Youth Offending Teams and partner agencies meet their statutory obligations via the appropriate allocation of resources;
• P rovide support and guidance to the designated YJ manager;
• R eview the performance of the Youth Offending Teams via the quarterly performance report and commit resources to understand and remove any barriers to performance within their own agencies;
• R eview the position of the Youth Offending Teams in line with national and local policy drivers;
• R eview any operational issues/barriers impacting upon the delivery of youth justice services which could impact strategically or upon performance and identify solutions to overcome these;
• D etermine and agree funds and resources necessary to provide effective Youth Offending 
Teams;
• O versee reviews following Community Safeguarding and Public Protection Incidents or Serious Case Reviews and assist in the dissemination of learning or challenging of service provision/delivery;
• E nsure that the local youth justice system is safely managed, with particular reference to the management of risk and safeguarding of young people.
• E nsure that the services for young people who offend are an integral part of the services and provision for Nottinghamshire children and young people.
5. Membership of the Board
• S ervice Director, Youth,  Families and Social Work 
(NCC) (Chair)
• G roup Manager, Early Help (NCC) (YJ Head of Service)
• Service Manager (lead on YJs) (NCC)
• G roup Manager, Children's Social Work Services 
(NCC)
• Principal Educational Psychologist,  (NCC)
• Superintendent - Nottinghamshire Police 
• H ead of Nottinghamshire Probation Service - Nottinghamshire Probation 
• C orporate Director - District Council (Representing District Councils) 
• C hief Executive - Police and Crime Commissioner's office  
• S enior Public Health and Commissioning 
Manager - Children's Integrated Commissioning 
Hub (representing Clinical Commissioning 
Groups)
• S ervice Manager (Homelessness Commissioning Manager) (NCC)
• YJ Staff representative
In order to be quorate, there must be representation from at least three statutory partners. A YJB representative is invited to each Board meeting.
6. Frequency of Meetings The Board will meet quarterly, following the production of quarterly performance information.  
Additional meetings will be held as necessary.  
7. Review
The terms of reference will be reviewed on  an annual basis.
 



This annual strategy was approved at the Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Board on and has been signed off by the Board pending final approval at Nottinghamshire's Children and Young Person's Committee and Full Council later in the year.
Signed:  
Steve Edwards
Chair of Nottinghamshire Youth Justice Board.
Dated:  18th July 2019


2

1









