












Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service
Annual Youth Justice Plan July 2019/2020
Section
1. Introduction and Context 
2. Review of 2018/2019
3. Structures and Governance 
4. Resources and Value for Money 
5. Partnership Arrangements 
6. Key Challenges and Risk to Future Delivery against Youth Justice Outcomes Measures. 
7. National and Local Priorities 2019/20.
Appendices
1. NPT Youth Justice Operational and improvement plan 
Signature Page 



1. Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice and Early Intervention Strategic Plan 2019- 2020.
2019 -2020: 
1. 	Introduction and Context
The principle aim of the Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service (YJ&EIS) is to prevent offending and re-offending by children and young people who are under 18 years of age. Section 39 (1) and Section 38 (1,2) of the Crime and Disorder Act requires that statutory partners which includes the Local Authority, Police, National Probation Service and Health co-operate to provide multi-agency Youth offending services to prevent offending by children and young people.
Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice and Early Intervention Services (NPT YJ&EIS) are incorporated within the Children's Services directorate of the council. Our early intervention and prevention model deployed within Children Services means that support can now be delivered at the earliest prevention stages, or equally, sustained beyond the young person's Court Order, with the overarching aim to support young people to achieve their potential and to prepare them to make a successful transition to adult and working life.
Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service is further required to meet the statutory requirements for Youth  Justice including National Standards and national inspection regimes, overseen by the Youth Justice Board and Ministry of Justice. It must continually seek to balance the risks and vulnerabilities of young people with the risk that this poses to the public and wider communities, while managing the overall ambition of improving outcomes for young offenders, their families, victims of crime and communities.
A Youth Justice Strategic Plan is required under the provisions of the Crime & Disorder act 1998. Standard requirements are outlined annually and the Plan should be approved locally by the Youth Justice Management Board prior to submission to the Youth Justice Board. The Western Bay Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service disaggregated in  April 2019 therefore the new  Youth Justice Strategic Plan will run  from 2019 -22  and will be  refreshed annually. It links with and contributes to the principles and priorities of the strategic Service plans of key partner agencies.
Since 2011 National Outcome measures for Youth Justice are:
• 	Reductions in the number of young people aged 10-17 who are entering the Youth Justice system for the first time (First Time Entrants);
• 	Reduce young people's reoffending;
• 	Reduce the number of young people sentenced to custody.
NPT YJ&EIS continues to monitor performance against National and Welsh performance indictors as well as contribute to local priorities to meet the needs of Neath Port Talbot young people, their families, victims of crime and their communities.
In addition, the service aims to respond to the findings and feedback from the HMIP Inspection which took place in October 2018. Improvement and action plans have been approved by the Youth Justice Management Board and are carried forward into the NPT YJ&EIS.






2. 	Review from 2018-2019  
Review of 2018/2019, shows there is an increase in Youth Offending figures in NPT 2018-2019 and an increase in the number of
offences. 
Neath Port TalbotYoung People Offending2018/192017/183928Offences2018/192017/189692First Time EntrantsThese are local figures as during the last 4 years the YJB published figures are for Western Bay.2018/192017/18238Custody2018/192017/1824NPT Rate per 10000.150.3Wales Rate per10000.160.29For the rate per 1000 of the population the only mid-year estimates available for NPT are from 2011.
The rate therefore for Neath Port Talbot is 0.15 and 0.3. The Wales population mid-year estimates are from 2017.
The rate for Wales is 0.16 and  0.29Referral Orders2018/192017/1821
11Youth Rehabilitation Orders2018/192017/1827ReoffendingReoffending figures are produced by the YJB and not produced locally. Historically the figures were produced as Western Bay of which Neath Port Talbot was part of.Western BayWalesJuly 16 - Jun 1751.50%46.90%July 15 - Jun 1647.40%47.90%First Time Entrants
Since 2014, Neath Port Talbot was part of the Western Bay Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service and has not had our own First Time Entrant data published by the Youth Justice Board due to the amalgamation of the service.
Now that we have disaggregated, in order to calculate the figures as if the service had remained as a separate region, local reports have been used to establish an approximate trend for the new service.
2015/162016/172017/182018/192620823
This set of figures can be compared favourably with historical figures published by the Youth Justice Board as in 2008/09 Neath Port Talbot had 225 First Time Entrants. The 2019/20 figures will be the first full year figures produced from PNC that will determine the new baseline for Neath Port Talbot. 
Reoffending
As discussed in the First Time Entrants section, Neath Port Talbot has been reformed this year and data has not been published since 2014 for the service. The only data available for reoffending is for the Western Bay Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service of which Neath Port Talbot was part of. The data published by the Youth Justice Board indicates that during the most recent 12 month rolling cohort the percentage reoffending has increased to 51.5% which is above the Welsh average. 
Western BayWalesJuly 16-Jun1751.5%46.9%July 15-Jun 1647.4%47.9%
Although the percentage of those reoffending has increased, the number of offenders in the cohort has decreased together with the numbers of those who have reoffended and their further offences.
Western Bay cohortWestern Bay reoffendersWestern Bay reoffensesJuly 16-Jun1716987278July 15-Jun 16230109362
These figures can also be compared favourably with historical Neath Port Talbot figures when, for a 12 month rolling cohort in 2008/09 Neath Port Talbot had almost double the number of offenders in the cohort that Western Bay currently has.
NPT cohortNPT reoffendersNPT reoffencesApr 08 - Mar 0933498274Due to the large number in the cohort in 2008/09 this resulted in the percentage reoffending of 29.3% which is significantly lower than the most recent Western Bay figure. We will therefore need to wait for the first set of data for Neath Port Talbot to be published to determine our new baseline. 

Custody
2015/162016/172017/182018/194242
The custody figures are currently at a low number compared with an historical figures of 18 custodial sentences in Neath Port Talbot in 2008/09. 
The last 10-17 year old population figure for Neath Port Talbot was for 2012. If this figure is used the table below shows the rate per 1000 for the area.
2018/19 NPT approx South WalesWalesEngland and Wales0.160.190.160.30
These are approximate figures which show Neath Port Talbot has a better rate per 1000 than South Wales and England and Wales. This figure will be more accurate once the disaggregation of the region is established in the YJB returns.
There were no custodial remands for Neath Port Talbot during 2018/19. 
However, serious offences and/or group offences can cause a spike in figures and a significant increase in remand costs which are based on bed nights and placement type which is dependent on the young persons' age and vulnerability. To mitigate this, qualified experienced staff and management, support this unpredictable and potentially high cost area of work for the local authority, through attendance at Court, and effective liaison with countrywide youth offending teams and Courts; as well as ongoing monitoring and management of young people transferred into NPT, who are often high risk and /or vulnerable and who are managed in the community under Intensive Surveillance and Support.
Reducing reoffending amongst young people subject to a Court Order remains a challenge year on year as these young people are likely to be more persistent and entrenched in their offending behaviour and have multiple, complex needs, requiring specialist input, assessment, risk management and support from experienced and suitably qualified practitioners in the multi-agency teams. Since disaggregation, the structure of NPT YJ&EIS is under review and more social workers have been employed to shore up the service with the skills needed to ensure that the service meets this cohort of young people with complex needs.  
Resources and Interventions
NPT YJ&EIS has access to a wide range of group work and one-to-one programmes to meet the diverse needs of young people accessing our service. Last year, new resources were purchased to support the targeting of interventions and in particular, awareness raising around national and local concerns in relation to knife crime. A female focused offending behaviour programme is a further additional resource purchased last year to support our work with young females embroiled in offending, which supports exploration of the impact of lifestyle choices and options by continued offending as well as supporting discussions around CSE, healthy relationships and the long term outcomes and lifestyle impact associated with relationships with other young people who offend. 
Over the next year, an analysis of the needs of young people accessing NPT YJ&EIS alongside the recording of unmet need within the Pathways and Planning section of Asset Plus, will support the service in ensuring we have access to the right interventions to support young people to make better choices and behavioural changes. 
There are currently a number of group based interventions being developed in conjunction with partner agencies including:
1. The Phoenix project (MAWW Fire Service)
2. The K9 project (South Wales Police) 
3. English and Maths tuition for young people who are NEET or young people excluded from their current provision (Hillside Secure Unit, Cefn Saeson and the YJEIS)

Young People not in Education Training and Employment
Engaging young offenders in education, training or employment is a key factor in preventing young people's reoffending and their resettlement. This has become a greater challenge in recent years reflecting the changes to the cohort of young people in the Youth Justice System who now increasingly have complex and multiple needs and who are more entrenched in offending than in the past. These young people are often the hardest to engage and sustain in full time ETE.

Alongside this, the NPT Education Training and Employment (ETE) practitioner reports fewer training providers and college places being available to young people in the Youth Justice System because of the risks they pose and /or they fail to meet the qualification requirements for courses. Nationally, research indicates that young offenders have often experienced disrupted education, have low levels of literacy and numeracy, and high levels of special education needs.

Education, Employment and Training: 2018/2019 

In NPT we have one Youth Justice ETE practitioner who was appointed to provide ongoing support for these young people. The principal Officer for Youth Justice is linking in with NAASH (Neath and Afan Secondary Heads), the local College and Swansea University. Our ETE practitioner links with the Engagement and Progression Co-ordinator, the NEETS Multi Agency Group and the Engagement Provider Support group, ASD Steering Group, The operational manger attends the Youth Engagement Strategy Group and we also meet with Pupil Parent support and the Senior Wellbeing Manager every two months to discuss individual cases. 

The YJEIS is also developing links with Hillside Secure Children's Home to try and develop an education centre as part of the planned resource centre so that programmes of education with accreditation can be offered as an alternative to exclusion for specific periods of time. The biggest challenge for this is having a premises/ resource centre which is suitable for the intervention that we are undertaking.

We have also made links with the local alternative education provision to look at a collaborative project between staff at the school in Hillside and NPT YJ&EIS. We will be developing this further as the school returns in September. 

A total of 18 young people's orders ended during the period April 2018 - March 2019. 14 YP were in ETE at end of their order, of those, 3 were in part time ETE (One YP of school age was NEET at end of their Order, twice during the year).

A total of 24 young people's orders ended during the period April 2017 - March 2018. 15 YP were in ETE at end of their order, of those, 3 were in part time ETE  (One YP above school age was NEET at end of their Order, four times during the year).

A total of 24 young people's orders ended during the period April 2016 - March 2017. 18 YP were in ETE at end of order, of those, 6 were in part time ETE (One YP of school age was NEET at end of their Order, twice during the year).
       
Restorative justice: 
Restorative justice approaches and opportunities for victims of youth crime continued to be a focus in 2018/19. All victims of youth crime are invited to participate in the criminal justice process in accordance with the Victim Code. This includes: 
1)  A letter of apology or explanation from the young person
2) Attending a Referral Order Panel Meeting where the victim can meet the young person and explain the impact their offending has had on them
3) A Restorative Justice Conference where the victim can meet the young person and explain the impact their offending has had on them
4) The victim of the offence having a say in what type of reparation they would like the young person to complete and can be indirect to benefit the local community and/or direct to the victim of the offence  
There are enhanced entitlements as sent out in the Victims Code of Practice for victims in the following categories because they are more likely to require enhanced support and services through the criminal justice process. In the Neath Port Talbot YJEIS, the victim liaison officer liaises with the Youth Justice Service Police Officer to ascertain whether a victim should be considered under one of the following categories and has established links locally to fulfil these duties. 
1) Victims of the most serious crime
2) Persistently targeted victims 
3) Vulnerable or intimidated victims 
NPT has a portfolio of reparation projects that are developed locally with partner agencies including housing providers, parks, schools, the environmental department, charities and local churches. 
NPT has one Youth Justice Victim Liaison officer who facilitates restorative meetings and conferences and ensures the impact on victims is considered in young people's offending behaviour programmes. 27 victims received restorative outcomes including direct or indirect reparation in 2018/19. All victims of crime are consulted in relation to restorative options; however, engagement is voluntary and not all victims chose to engage in this process following initial consultation. The service has good links with Victim Support including signposting and liaising with provision for supporting young victims.
Restorative principles are applied in Referral Order Panels. Referral Order Panel volunteers are recruited from local communities and receive restorative justice training as part of the programme. Recruitment for Referral Order panel volunteers took place earlier this year and in July 2019, 5 volunteers underwent the training programme, providing valuable community involvement. 
NPT offers all young people engaging in restorative justice the opportunity to complete an Agroed Cymru unit called Restorative Justice (EC61CY002) Level 1 (credit value 1). 
HMIP Inspection report March 2019 
This Inspection focused on the quality of assessment and risk management and effective management oversight. The report was critical of the previous regional arrangements and highlighted concerns regarding safeguarding, recording of information, and lack of information being provided to the management board. The inspectorate issued an organisational alert such was the level of concern. 

The background to the regional Youth Justice Arrangements: 
Bridgend, Neath Port Talbot and Swansea Youth Offending Teams had been a merged service since 29 May 2014 when the first WBYJ and EIS Management Board was held and all local management boards ceased to exist. The previous  Management Board was chaired by Neath Port Talbot County Borough Council's Director of Social Services Health and Housing, and had a membership in line with the requirements of the Crime and Disorder Act including cabinet members from all three local authorities.

It is well documented that the root causes of crime are multifaceted and tackling these factors requires input from a range of agencies and services at both a strategic level (planning & delivering local service provision) and a practical level (planning & delivering interventions).

Following the publication of the inspection report by HMIP in March 2019 following an inspection of the service in October 2018, on the 1st April 2019 Western Bay Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service disaggregated and NPT now hosts a stand-alone service for youth offending and early intervention. A new management board has been created which serves NPT alone. 

The rationale for disaggregation is that the YJS teams need to focus on their own geographical areas and the demographic of those areas, providing services for the young people of Neath and Port Talbot. Following publication of the final HMIP report in March 2019 and combined with the planned exit of Bridgend, it was felt that the best way forward was to return to single Youth Justice Teams.

The YJEIS is on an improvement journey, draft action and improvement plans have been presented to the Management Board and are being finalised, they will also be presented to the West Glamorgan Safeguarding Board. The YJEIS are being monitored by the YJB and are working to strengthen the service in terms of concerns raised by the inspectorate. Moving forward NPT will need to evidence its ability to deliver the statutory functions laid out in the Crime & Disorder Act and subsequent legislation independently of the other two localities.

The Director of Social Services will have overall governance of the disaggregation for NPT YJ&EIS (Youth Justice and Early Intervention service.) The service is headed by a Principal Officer and strategic lead who reports to the Head of Children Services.
       
The inspectorate focused on Asset plus assessment training, and risk management meetings established to support risk management planning. Inconsistencies in effective management oversight and in the distribution of expertise and skills across the regional teams were also noted as well as the need for the voice of the victim and the voice of the young person to be more visible, which the service aims to address in the coming year.

The direction of travel for the NPT YJEIS going forward has to be effective management of public protection issues in all cases as well as strong processes for managing risk, and effective and closer links with children's social services and early intervention services. Findings and action plans to address areas for improvement were shared with and are monitored by the Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice and Early Intervention Management Board.

Asset Plus
Asset Plus was introduced as a new national assessment framework for all Youth Justice /Youth Offending Services in 2016. NPT YJ&EIS delivered the three day training course via the Managing Director of Silver Bullet Business Training to all asset plus authors in June 2019.  Asset plus is now fully implemented in NPT to meet this national requirement. The quality of the asset assessments is being dip sampled and quality assured by the management team at the YJEIS.
Ongoing support and refresher training as well as training for new staff will be necessary throughout the coming year to ensure this is fully embedded. This has already been booked. 

3. 	Structure and Governance

"Youth Offending Teams aim to prevent and reduce offending, reoffending and anti-social behaviour amongst children and young people.

In Neath Port Talbot we strive to achieve this aim through the delivery of the right high-quality services provided at the right time for and informed by children, young people, parents and carers, victims and the wider community and partners. These services will be provided cost effectively by a diverse, competent and well supported staff group."

We are striving to include the young person's voice in the delivery of our services; participation and consultation is an integral feature of the service. A young person involved in serious offending was introduced to the bike maintenance project where a bike was repaired for charity and then the young person was then able to repair one for himself; in response to this the young person said "I am so glad I got arrested, the YJS has changed my life all I want to do is ride my bike and stay out of trouble it's me and my bike now.'' Another young person who attended the first emergency services fun day and took part in the first aid activities, wants to now join the ambulance service, we will be ensuring that the wishes and feelings of the young people using our services will be heard and represented. 

July 2019 included a review of the board terms of reference and membership of the management board, the post inspection action plan has highlighted the need for robust quality assurance, audit reporting and developing of a quality assurance framework we will be reporting audits into the management board each quarter along-side the performance management information. Swansea and Neath Port Talbot are also setting up a subgroup to review all policies and procedures to ensure that they are fit for purpose. There is an expectation drive from board members and Social services committee members to have evidence of what difference audits are making to quality.

Youth Justice is located within Neath Port Talbot Children Services, Health and Housing Directorate. Service delivery is in the Youth Justice Service building, geographically located in Port Talbot. The service is led by the Principal Officer who is the strategic lead for the service, there is an Interim Operational Manager and two Senior Social Work practitioners who head a team of Social Workers, Intervention Workers, ETE worker, Police Officer, Probation Officer, Speech and Language Therapist, Victim Worker, Substance Misuse workers, Information Officer and Business Support). We have some limited CAMHS support, but we are closely working with our health colleagues to look at how we could utilise a primary health care worker in the team and establish how this could be funded. This post would be to begin to support the primary health needs of our young people and be a support service for their emotional health and wellbeing. A joint working party with Swansea Bay University Health Board has been set up to progress this work stream. 

The Youth Justice Principal Officer is managed by the Head of Children Services. The Principal Officer is also part of the Children Services Principal Officer group who meet weekly as the managers of Children Services.  The Principal Officer provides strategic oversight and operational direction for the service led by the Head of Children Services.

A Youth Justice Management Board (NPT YJMB) is in place which is chaired by the Director of Social Services. There is senior representation from partners from National Probation Service, Police, Police and Crime Commissioner and Health, Education, Housing, Safeguarding and Early Help. There are also invited board members, including Barnardos, The Family Courts and Careers Wales. The Board meets bi monthly but this is now going to be moved to monthly to ensure that the improvement plan remains a priority for all board members.  The management board takes responsibility for agreeing agency contributions to Youth Justice Services and monitoring the budget and grant conditions. It reviews Youth Justice Performance, monitors Improvement Plans and advises on national and local Youth Justice issues to ensure that the statutory Youth Justice duties and responsibilities are met, and that key Youth Justice Outcomes are delivered. 

Youth Justice is delivered directly to young offenders, directly by the YJEIS under the umbrella of children services, most aspects of the service being centrally managed by specialist Youth Justice Staff, including Intensive Supervision and Surveillance, (ISS) Custody, Bail and Remand and victims, the bureau and Youth Justice Interventions.

The Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service provides support to vulnerable young people and their families to reduce their escalation into specialist services or into statutory services in relation to young offenders, Children Looked After and care leavers. The inclusion of the multi-disciplinary Youth Justice Service staff in this integrated model enables the sharing of expertise and transferable skills that benefits all targeted practitioners in the service and allows for a more co-ordinated response to the individual children and young people who often have multiple, complex needs. 

The YJB, the Welsh YJS managers and YCS provide operational guidance and policy support to the YJEIS, to ensure effective Youth Justice Service delivery. The senior managers, Head of service and chair of the Management board are responsible for strategy performance, quality assurance and the coordination and delivery of Youth Justice Provision to the Courts. 

4.	Resources and Value for money:
NPT exceeds the minimum staffing requirements set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 for a multi-agency youth offending team. Currently the Youth Justice Service management team consists of a Principal Officer (who reports directly to the Head of Children's Services), one operational manager, 2 senior practitioners, a business support manager and an information officer. A number of these posts are currently filled on an interim basis and discussions are taking place, to ensure that these posts are permanently filled in the forthcoming months to ensure the ongoing stability of the service. In total there are 22 practitioners and administration staff. As well as generic Youth Justice Officers, who are social work trained or alternatively qualified, the service includes a speech and language therapist, 2 substance misuse workers, an education worker, a seconded police officer (1 FTE) and probation officer (0.3FTE). 
The National Probation Service (NPS) resource into the Youth Justice Service is determined using a National formula; there has been no overall reduction in the resource for 2019/2020. In 2018/19, there was one full-time equivalent post across Western Bay that was delivered via two part-time posts (previous shared post across NPT and Swansea); following disaggregation of the service in April 2019, the full-time equivalent post was spilt across the three localities with the provision in NPT at 0.3 FTE of a post.  At the time of disaggregation, it was felt that separate probation officers would ensure dedicated and protected time was received within each locality; however, this has presented challenges given the dual aspects of their role and with the NPT Probation Officer now taking up post in Swansea, it is hoped that this will offer greater flexibility across the services as workload dictates. 
Staffing contributions from other partners are under review. The YJS are working closely with Health (SBUHB & CAMHS) to better understand the emotional health and wellbeing needs of young people known to the service to determine the resource contribution required from health long-term. The YJS are undertaking a data exercise to support this piece of work. The current resource available to the service remains the same and includes dedicated psychiatry and psychology time for case consultation (which enables referrals into CAMHS for assessment to be expedited where required), as well as access to a monthly sexual health clinics held onsite at the YJS. 
The addition of two further social work posts at the outset of the financial year, has ensured that social work capacity within the service is strengthened to allow for smaller caseloads to manage the complex and high risk young people known to our service; recruitment to these posts has taken place.
NPT Youth Justice Service recruits, trains and supports volunteers from the community to act as Youth Offender Panel volunteers to meet the requirements of Referral Orders made in the Youth Court, to participate in Bureau panel for out-of-court disposals and act as Appropriate Adults at the Police station. There are currently approximately 9 Youth Offender Panel volunteers, 2 Youth Bureau Panel volunteers and 2 Appropriate Adult volunteers. A large proportion of the staff group have recently undergone Appropriate Adult refresher training to support the latter function during the working day and outside of working hours, this function is supported by the NPT Emergency Duty Team. 
Numbers of young people coming into the Youth Justice system have now been relatively consistent for the last three years, compared to the much higher numbers seen previously in line with the national trend. Policy changes and greater diversion and restorative justice opportunities for more minor or first time offending mean that young people coming into the formal Youth Justice system are now more likely to be more entrenched offenders and often have multiple, complex needs requiring more specialist and intensive support to help them turn their lives around or those young people who have committed one-off serious offences. 
The budget is illustrated below for 2019/20. Grants received from the Youth Justice Board (YJB), Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) and Promoting Positive Engagement (PPE) remain fixed at the same levels as 2018/19. Statutory partners have indicated levels of continuing contribution and funding in kind for 2019/20. The Police Service and the National Probation Service continues to maintain its level of contribution at this time and the contribution from Health contribution is currently under review. Funding is reviewed annually and is likely to remain a challenge for all agencies in the coming years as services continue to be delivered in a difficult financial climate.
Funding 

From the April 1st the grant funding originally received from the YJB is now paid directly to Neath Port Talbot.
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998, Section 39(1) placed a duty on each local authority, acting with its statutory partners (police, probation and health) to establish youth offending teams in their local area to deliver youth justice services.  Section 38(3) of the Act placed a duty on the local authority and its statutory partners to make payment towards the expenditure incurred in providing youth justice services.  The purpose of the new NPT YJEIS is to ensure that youth justice services are available across the local authority. 






 YJEIS budget 2019/2020 Costs and ContributionsAgencyStaffing CostsPayments in kindOther delegated fundsTotalPolice0000Police and Crime Commissioner0035,80035,800Probation0000Health004,2804,280Local Authority373,500040,140413,640Wales Assembly Government193,48600193,486YJB217,00000217,000Other0000Total783,986080,220864,206
The service remains based at a single site in Port Talbot. The pursuit of an alternative premise to house the current workforce and allow for the development of a resource centre is a key priority for the service moving forward. Progressing this is a challenge and is dependent on the availability and in turn, suitability of vacant buildings in the area as well as financial constraints. 
5. 	Partnership Arrangements
Effective partnerships are in place with statutory partners and as a single authority service, NPT YJEIS sits on the community safety board and we report into this board on a quarterly basis. Both at strategic and operational levels and with local anti-social behaviour strategies and initiatives.
Youth Justice is represented on key strategic forums and other relevant forums that contribute to a co-ordinated and effective delivery of services. These include:
• 	Court Users group and Family Justice Board. 
• 	Multi-Agency Public Protection strategic group
• 	Integrated Offender Management Strategic Board
• 	Channel Panel to prevent radical extremism
• 	Safeguarding Children's Board as a board member
* LSCB sub - groups including practice review groups. 
• 	The Principal Officer for the YJS is the chair of Better futures partnership for HSB and CSE cases 

Police, Probation and Health (CAMHS)  and WCADA each second staff to the multi-agency NPT YJEIS  deliver interventions to young offenders and contribute to the  Youth Justice budget together with the local authority Children Services and Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) to ensure national Youth Justice Indicators and government priorities are met alongside locally identified priorities.
The Service works closely with partners on key issues including Troubled Families agenda; Early Help strategy; Child sexual exploitation, LAC young people involved in offending; homelessness and accommodation needs of young offenders; substance misuse; young people who are NEET; young people with SEND; remand management; overnight detention of young people arrested and refused bail; and reports on key issues to Children's Services Management team; Social Services Health and Housing Cabinet and scrutiny panels; the community safety partnership, and West Glamorgan Safeguarding  Children Board.  
The resettlement of young people leaving custody continues to be a key priority for the Service for 2019-20 and will be overseen by Youth Justice senior managers, working with partners to ensure employment and training; accommodation needs, substance use and mental health support and effective transitions for this often vulnerable and /or high risk group and of young people.	
Young people's substance use services are commissioned from WCADA both for consultation, and direct treatment interventions to Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service. 
Youth Justice works closely with the National Probation Service (NPS). Young People are referred into Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) for oversight of risk management. This process engages professionals with expertise and understanding of children and young people as well as criminal justice, and has been able to engage in developing bespoke arrangements for the small number of children and young people who present a significant risk to the public in the County.
The service links with the County's Integrated Offender Management arrangements which is a multi-agency strategic and operational initiative designed to identify and offer enhanced support to offenders presenting high risk of serious re-offending. Although the majority of the offenders identified are adults, liaison is in place to ensure effective Information sharing and identification of high risk young people. Our Youth Justice Police Officer is responsible for identifying cases that meet IOM cohort criteria and for liaising with IOM management to determine adoption. This is achieved using intelligence within NPT YJEIS and South Wales Police. 
The Operational manager for the YJEIS represents Children's Services on the multi-agency Channel forum which identifies and provides support to vulnerable young people at risk of radicalisation, as part of the government 'Prevent Strategy' aimed at preventing extremist radicalisation and terrorism.
Young people and gang activity has emerged as a concern in the last 12 months including an increase in young people subject to Court Orders being moved to NPT  from London Manchester and Liverpool,  to escape gang violence, and awareness of 'County Lines' - cross border serious gang led offending. Responses to this emerging issue are being explored with Police and partners to develop a countywide joined up strategy. Gang activity and concerns are currently monitored through the Youth Justice Risk management arrangements on individual cases, and information is shared between Police and Youth Justice and relevant agencies on wider gang activity.
Further developments for Youth Justice in 2019/20 in partnership with The Police and crime commissioner's Office, South Wales Police and Children's Services will include developing responses to young people in the Criminal Justice System who are responsible for domestic violence, responding to the criminal exploitation of young people, and responding to the national agenda of addressing serious and violent crime including Knife and gun crime. 

6.	Key Challenges and Risks to Future Delivery
Key challenges and risks to future delivery have been highlighted throughout the Plan and are summarised here:-
First Time Entrants
Low levels of First Time Entrants has been achieved since 2009 reflecting the national picture as young people are engaged outside of the formal Youth Justice system wherever possible, through diversion and restorative justice opportunities. Numbers have levelled out and reductions will prove more of a challenge as some young people who have been diverted previously may reoffend more seriously or persistently. Continued efforts and resources will be required by Police and Youth Justice to maintain the progress achieved. This includes ensuring effective assessment of risk and need and the provision of diversionary opportunities; monitoring of outcomes to help us understand the reasons for any increases; and the delivery of prevention and early help with local partners to families identified as vulnerable and/or at risk where partnership resources are reducing.
Reduce Reoffending
Reducing young people's reoffending continues to prove a challenge despite greater numbers of young people being diverted away from the criminal justice system for less serious offending. Those young people who do escalate do so invariably with more entrenched offending behaviour, and often have multiple complex needs. These young people require increased contact levels and specialist input from experienced and trained practitioners to prevent further offending and achieve positive outcomes. Sustained specialist input to young people with complex needs and high levels of risk remains a priority in 2019/2020. Further evaluation of quality and effectiveness of interventions and reoffending data is required to improve targeting of resources and have a positive impact on future reoffending rates.
Reduce use of Custody
Significant reductions in custody rates have been achieved in 2018/2019 although percentage improvement remains a challenge year on year, being harder to achieve when overall disposals are falling. In common with the national trend young people who are looked after and BME young people continue to be over-represented in the custodial population. The service is working with wider Children's Services and our partner agencies to ensure access to effective resettlement support and improve outcomes for these young people. In NPT poverty and social inequality is also a factor to consider alongside substance and drug misuse. The increase in county lines and criminal exploitation along the M4 corridor from Newport to Swansea make our young people in Neath Port Talbot especially vulnerable. The remand population remains unpredictable and the duration of remands can vary.  A small number of younger children committing serious offences or an offence involving a group of young people can have a major impact on resources
The financial risk to the local authority 
Young people who are aged 16 and under are placed in Secure Training centres (STC) or Secure Children's Homes (SCH) which are costlier than Youth Offender Institutes (YOI); this is closely monitored by the Youth Justice Service to ensure the appropriate designated authority is named at Court and that there is close liaison and verification with Children's services placements and finance teams to ensure that risks are mitigated. We are in a more fortunate position in that our Welsh secure unit is based in Neath Port Talbot and therefore, we can ensure strong working relationships with the RI who is also the Head of Children's Services and therefore is fully sighted on all of the issues regarding Hillside. The Principal Officer was also the previous Principal Manager of Hillside Children' s secure unit and therefore fully understands the financial implications and the opportunities for outreach work between Hillside and the YJEIS. 

Young People in Education and Training
Performance in relation to ensuring young offenders are engaged in Education, Training and Employment has dipped over time and remains a challenge to achieve and sustain for young people in the Youth Justice Service. There is enhanced support from our Youth Justice Education Training & Employment practitioner in the YJEIS team. There is regular monitoring of the cohort of young people who are not engaged in ETE to help us understand the reasons for this and to identify areas and strategies for improvement. 
Restorative Justice
There will be a continued focus in 2019/20 on development of Restorative Justice projects to provide victims of crime with a range of relevant options to support the opportunity for their inclusion in the Justice Process while providing young offenders with an effective deterrent experience. 
Maintaining Effective Risk Management and Management Oversight of Youth Justice and Implementation of Asset plus:
Improvements in risk management and assessment quality are an integral part of the post inspection action plan and we have made sure that is a primary focus of our work going forward. The QA of asset plus and risk management oversight remain key priorities for 2019/20. In addition, the embedding of Asset plus requires further and on-going refresher training across the service in 2019/20; again this forms part of the post inspection action plan. 


Local Risk Management: 
Whilst there are three key agencies forming the "responsible authority" for MAPPA (i.e. police, prisons and probation), NPT YJEIS has a duty to cooperate. Over the past 18 months this has been an area where efforts have been concentrated through the pilot of the ECM approach. However, there is still a need to concentrate on this area and the recognition that some of our high risk cases are not subject to statutory orders but within the cohort subject to out of court disposals. 
County Lines, violence and knife crime are becoming more prevalent and this needs to be responded to appropriately on a multi-agency basis. Through CSP and IOM approaches there is a growing understanding and willingness to work together as the most common re-offence is that of violence.
As already highlighted we need to address reoffending. The reoffending toolkit has been developed from the findings of the deep dive audit completed in 2016. The approach lends itself to the implementation of trauma informed practice and all staff have been trained in this approach. This will continue to be a focus amongst the YJEIS staff group. The service are holding regular development days; these have been used to address the post inspection action plan to date, but going forward these will be used for communication of key developments and the sharing of practice. 
Staff development this year will focus on how we address knife crime prevention, utilise AIM 2 and how it complements the Better Futures service level agreement.  There may be lessons to be learnt over the next 12 months from the Wrexham YOS service as our nominated partner in practice. 
In response to potential violent offending and the risks of knife crime the service has developed an awareness raising package for schools.
Vulnerability management safeguarding and wellbeing. 
As with risk management, safeguarding relies on robust and accurate assessment and listening to what the child or young person is saying. This is a priority area that alongside risk management is a primary focus of the service. The service needs to address the gap in evidencing wellbeing outcomes. This work is currently being completed with health colleagues and although we are at early stages I feel confident that the development of the service will address this. 
We have reviewed safeguarding systems in the service, this highlights areas of duplication etc. and informs the service if there are gaps in relation to practice relating to the safeguarding of our children and young people.  A quarterly safeguarding audit is in draft but not complete at the time of writing this plan. A safeguarding spread sheet has been developed which tracks and analyses referrals, reason for referrals and outcomes; thus giving a clear picture of the safeguarding needs of our young people in the service.  
The Chair of the NPT YJEIS Management Board Service is the Chair of the Western Bay Safeguarding Children Board (WBSCB) giving a robust strategic link to the safeguarding needs of children and young people known to the service. There are lessons to be learnt from child practice reviews and serious incidents within the community where the service has been supervising the child or young person who has become a victim or harmed themselves. A member of the management team is on the child practise review sub group of the safeguarding children board as well as the quality and performance sub group. The relationship between the service and safeguarding teams is good across the region and the "step up, step down" approach to meeting the needs of children and young people has improved over the last year as services are increasingly joining up to provide seamless services avoiding duplication.  

Safety and wellbeing cannot be seen in isolation of the services we provide to victims and their need to feel safe. We are very much part of NPT children services and regularly attend all identified safeguarding meetings professional strategy meetings and so on. 
Victim Engagement and Restorative Interventions. 
Positive victim involvement is always a priority for the service and with the opportunity to redesign the service on a local footprint, comes the opportunity to review the role of the victim worker improving links with reparation and enabling more visible outcomes for victims, our prevention workers, and their direct links to the reparation officer. It is anticipated that this will increase the number of victims accepting direct reparation.
Our restorative approaches training course developed with Agored Cymru continue to be available especially for schools, early intervention services and residential settings. 
Workforce development 
In addition to areas of training and management oversight already covered, the drive this year is to ensure everyone has a
clear role, good supervision and quality appraisals. Following the inspection, supervision arrangements were found to be 
lacking. This can have an impact on staff well-being and a knock-on effect on direct delivery. Supervision has now been reviewed and the proper process and arrangements area in place. Everyone has supervision in line with the NPT supervision policy and appraisals will form a part of that process going forward. Taking into account the amount of change and uncertainness experienced by staff, the poor inspection report and the general lack of information that the staff group felt they had, we need to concentrate on the health and well-being of our staff, and this is covered in our development days and will form part of everyone's appraisal. This area will be kept a priority and feeds into the management team. The building of staff morale is essential to maintain staff commitment, reduce sickness and maintain staff continuity. 
Participation 
Engaging young people in decision making and accepting responsibilities for their actions and future is critical to developing skills as constructive members of their community; Article 12 of the UNCRC establishes the right of young people to participate where decisions are being made that affect their future.
We aim to develop a young person's sub group of the management board. An independent member of the management board has met with 3 young people and will be meeting with more. We have identified a young person who is going to be a YJS champion, and is attending the management board development days with support from his worker. Eventually we will want our young people sub group to represent the whole area of service delivery i.e.  pre-court, post court and exit planning. 
As with previous years, victim feedback gathered by volunteers over the phone evidenced an overall satisfaction with the service and a growing positive view of restorative approaches; however, the numbers giving feedback in the new NPT service have not been measured as yet. We will be collating these going forward.  
Parenting groups have recently been re- established in NPT and the first ones are beginning in September 2019. There was
hugely positive feedback about the NVR parenting course when we were a regional service.  The previous key messages were
around the need for consistency of messages given by the parenting worker, case manager, childcare social workers and
schools. One of the aims of the parenting group for NPT YJ&EIS is to reduce the mixed messages that the parents can receive
from professionals and improve consistency per se. There are four workers at NPT YJ&EIS trained in providing the NVR course.  

Staff retention in NPT YJEIS is not problematic, we are a long standing and established service with experienced and
committed practitioners. Therefore the levels of distribution of youth justice expertise across the service and the close
collaboration with Children services are a firm base on which to develop the NPT YJEIS service. What now needs to be done
is the embedding and permanent recruitment of long standing temporary appointments, so that the staffing structure meets
the needs of the service. 

We have increased our numbers of social work practitioners, given responsibility to a principal officer to lead the service, and
are going to be recruiting a consultant social worker using one of the existing senior practitioner post to develop our social
work team further.

Probation, Education, South Wales Police and our intervention workers, including Speech and Language therapist, substance
misuse workers, Bail support worker, volunteer coordinator, victim support worker and reparation and transition officers are
all key players in the multi -agency service approach and we will keep developing these services to meet the complex needs
of our young people. 

Administration support and business management is a crucial element of the service and integral to the success of our work
alongside performance and information management. This part of the business needs extra support and resource to manage
the amount of work that is generated including administratively supporting the management board.

Training, monitoring and support are provided by the senior management team and our local authority training department 
to ensure required standards are met.

Staff recruitment and retention in NPT YJEIS
Retention of qualified social work staff in NPT YJ&EIS and the impact of this for maintaining effective Youth Justice Practice
do not appear to be a risk to delivery at this juncture, although it is important to recognise that resources must be allocated
to meet the additional training and necessary management support needs of new and/or inexperienced staff within NPT
YJEIS.

Recruitment processes have been undertaken and we have recently employed two new social workers. We will be ensuring
that the temporary posts in situ at present will be made permanent and recruit to those posts.  The job description and
person specification for all posts in the YJ&EIS going forward will be specific about the skill set and expertise required, which
should help attract the more qualified and experienced staff. 

The NPT HR and the senior management team are fully engaged with supporting the teams including delivering induction and
training and development days, guidance, gatekeeping, alongside quality assurance and management reports to track 
progress. The strategic lead is full engaged with the LSCB, CSP and subgroups to ensure that the YJ&EIS are fully represented in all external and partnership arenas. 
Planned restructure
A final permanent structure of the NPT YJ&EIS is going to be formalised by the end of 2019 and will require effective
leadership and close links with HR to ensure safe and effective practice is maintained.  It is anticipated that the changes 
made to date will continue but with the posts being made permanent. The current interim structure is set out below following 
disaggregation in April 2019. 

7.	Youth Justice National and Local Priorities 2019/20
The Service continues to ensure core statutory Youth Justice delivery to young people and families, pre-court and court services, and meet national and local priorities. These are outlined below and key actions are detailed in the Youth Justice Service operational plan 2019-20, which is monitored through the Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice Management Board and Children Services, this plan sets out local priorities incorporates actions from  the recent  Inspection findings. These priorities are set out in the operational and improvement plan which is included in the appendices of this report. 
National Youth Justice Priorities:
• To reduce the number of First time entrants to the Youth Justice System who are aged 10-17
• To reduce young people's proven re-offending
• To reduce the number of young people who are sentenced to custody.
Local priorities:
• Reduce disproportionality and ensure that outcomes and the experience of BME young people in the Youth Justice system are proportionate and fair
• Prevent the criminalisation of Looked After children in the Youth Justice system
• Ensure that young offenders are supported to engage in education, training or employment.
• Prevention and safeguarding of young people at risk of gang involvement and child sexual exploitation
• Youth Justice quality assurance of assessment, planning and interventions for young People in the Youth Justice System
• Services to victims and restorative justice opportunities
• Workforce development to ensure effective and quality youth justice service delivery
• Service development to improve responses to young people affected by domestic abuse. 
Priority areas: 
1.  OUT OF COURT DISPOSALS 
Aims: 
• Out of Court disposals are consistently applied & effective in diverting young people from Court where appropriate
• Recommendations from the Laming Review are implemented
The lead services for this priority are:
Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service
CS/Police
By when: October 2019.
Expected outcomes would be:
• Reduce FTE
• Safeguard Young people in the Youth Justice System
• Reduce LAC in the YJS
2.  APPROPRIATE ADULT AND PACE TRANSFER. 
Aims:
• Young people at the Police station are safeguarded
• Prevent overnight detention at the Police station for children arrested and refused bail
• Prevent offending and reoffending of LAC 
The lead services to meet this priority are: 
Youth Justice 
Children services.
South Wales Police 
By when:  March/ April 2020 
Expected outcomes would be: 
• Reduce reoffending
• Reduce the use of Custody
3.  SERVICES TO THE COURTS. 
Aims: 
• Ensure effective representation and Youth Court Practice
• Confidence of the Courts and Public is maintained and justice is served to victims and communities.
The lead services to meet this priority would be: 
YJS EIS - on -going.
South Wales Police. 

Expected / desired outcomes would be: 
Reduction in custody
Appropriate interventions
Increased use of Bureau 
More reparation and community based interventions
Partnership working to support young people and their families. 
Better use of court time. 
4. PREVENTION AND EARLY HELP 
Aims:
• Families are offered early help to prevent escalation into specialist services.
• Services are joined up to ensure most positive outcomes for young People and their families
• Children in the care system are not disadvantaged in the YJS
• The promotion of equality and diversity in the YJS
The lead services to meet this priority are:
Police/Youth Justice and the courts. 
Intensive Support and Surveillance workers
By When?     March 2020
The expected/desired outcomes would be:  
Reduce offending.
Promote equality and diversity
Positive partnership working.
Reduction of FTE. 
Families feel supported. 
5. REDUCE PROPORTIONALITY.
Aims:
• Ensure that outcomes and the experience of minority groups including BME young people in the YJS are proportionate and fair
* Include the active offer of the Welsh Language for all our young people who require it. 
* Ensure that young people whose first language is Welsh are able to communicate to their YJS worker in their chosen language 
The lead services to meet this priority are: 
YJEIS Management team 
By when: October 2019
The expected outcomes are 
• Reduce reoffending
• Asset plus implementation
• YJ Quality Assurance.
• Promote equality and diversity. 

6. EFFECTIVE ASSESSMENT AND RISK MANAGEMENT 
Aims:
• Ensure that public protection risk and vulnerability are managed effectively.
• Reduce risk to victims and communities.
• Prevent radicalisation
• All managers involved in overseeing the quality of performance in YJEIS work do so to a consistently high standard within the team.
• There is a shared understanding of good quality assessment planning and intervention for young people in the YJS 
• Reduce reoffending
• Ensure young offenders are engaged in ETE.
• Equality & diversity in the YJS
• Reduce the use of custody
• Increase restorative justice opportunities
The lead services to meet this priority are:
YJEIS 
Children Services 


7. EDUCATION TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT
Aims:
• Information is shared to ensure effective risk management of serious sexual or violent offences in schools and colleges
• Young people with SEN needs are supported
Young people are engaged in ETE and supported to improve employability
The lead services to meet this priority are:
NPT YJEIS ongoing
Children Services and Education. 
By When? This is ongoing and is an integral form of good practice. 

The expected / desirable outcomes would be:
*  Reduce reoffending
*  Reduce the use of custody
*  Increase employment and training  opportunities
*  Reduce permanent exclusions.
*  Provide alternative education facilities i.e maths and English tutoring for YJ young people. 
*  Ensure that the educational needs of our young people are properly assessed.
*  Unpaid work & reparation provide learning opportunities for young people. 
8. RESTORATIVE JUSTICE
Aims: 
• Resettlement 
• Able to demonstrate that the victim perspective is apparent and influential wherever relevant and it contributes to Assessment 
• Planning Intervention and Supervision of Young people in the Youth Justice system
•  Young people make amends to victims and /or make a positive contribution to their community in as direct and relevant way as possible
•  Unpaid work & reparation provide learning opportunities for young People

The lead services to meet this priority are:
NPT YJEIS. 
By When?  December 2019 and then ongoing as an integral part of good practice. 
The expected / desirable outcomes are:
• Reduce reoffending
• Reduce the use of custody
•  Resettlement
•  Equality and diversity
• Hear the victim's voice as well as the young person. 
• Ensure that communities are part of the restorative approach and that 'they '
Get something back. 
9. GROUP PROGRAMMES
Aims:
• A range of effective programmes is available across NPT to address Young peoples' offending behaviour
• Ensure that there we provide robust programme options available to the Courts to support sentencing options
Lead services to meet this priority:
YJEIS 
By When?  September 2019 

Expected /desirable outcomes. 
Reduce offending behaviours. 
Reduce the use of custody. 
Address the reasons for offending behaviours. 
Providing group activities and interventions to address the behaviours and reasons for our young people who are engaged in or on the fringe of offending behaviours. 
Confidence building and life skills coaching for our young people.
Enable and support the courts to provide suitable sentencing options 
Improved outcomes for young people. 
10. ASSETPLUS
Aims:
• Implementation of national Asset plus assessment framework
• Ensure effective assessment and risk management
• Reduce the use of custody
• Effective remand management
• Resettlement support
Lead service to meet this priority: 
YJEIS 
By when?  September 2019, then ongoing as an integral part of good practice. 
Desired/expected outcomes. 
Robust risk assessment and risk management. 
Safeguarding needs identified 
Mandatory Quality assurance.
Comprehensive assessment process. 
11. CUSTODY & REMAND MANAGEMENT
Aims:
• maintain low custody rates
• To ensure that unnecessary Remands are avoided
• To Improve outcomes for young people
• Good Information sharing to enable improved outcomes for young people
Lead service to meet tis priority: 
Youth Justice and Early intervention service. 
South Wales Police. 
By when: December 2019. 
Expected / desired outcomes. 
• Safeguarding young people
• Reduce reoffending
• Reduced the use of custody
• Ensure that substance misuse service delivery arrangements are effective in delivery to YP in the NPT YJEIS.

12. PREVENTION & SAFEGUARDING OF YOUNG PEOPLE AT RISK OF GANG INVOLVEMENT OR SEXUAL EXPLOITATION
• Information is shared between agencies to reduce risk to communities and to safeguard young people
• Young people at risk are identified and supported to prevent risk of gang embedment or gang exploitation
• Young people in the Youth Justice system with substance misuse needs receive an appropriate intervention proportionate to the risk this poses to themselves, their family, & the public.
Lead agencies to meet this objective. 
Youth Justice and Early Intervention Service.
 South Wales Police
NPT Children services.
Barnardo's Better Futures.
By when? Ongoing, continuous work stream and integral to good practice. 
Expected / desired outcomes: 
Timely appropriate and thorough information sharing, to address the risks of CSE HSB and criminal exploitation, county lines and knife crime. 
Robust safeguarding actions and strategies to address exploitation risks. 
Partnership working with children services safeguarding, the community safety partnership and Prevent and Chanel panel, Probation and the police. 
13. WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT 
• Ensure workforce development in Services for Young People which prioritises a focus on Youth Justice. 
• To ensure that all staff understand Youth Justice Responsibilities to young people and families, the Courts and victims of youth crime
• To ensure the perception of staff of importance of youth justice as a priority is clear
• Ensure that there is an effective distribution of YJ expertise across the service to ensure that teams are equipped to deliver YJ responsibilities to a required standard and in line with national standards. 
Lead service to meet this priority 
Youth Justice and Early Intervention team.
Senior management team
Head of service. 
By when: restructure to be completed by January 2020
Training plan to be completed by December 2020 
Expected / desired outcomes:
A fully staffed service who are trained to meet the needs of our young people. 
A positive and motivated workforce whose well-being needs are also a primary consideration. 
A jointed up service with children's services to assess and manage risk and safeguarding needs of our young people. 
14. YOUTH JUSTICE SERVICE CONTRIBUTION
•  Ensure staff are aware of the relevance and importance of the youth justice contribution to wider services and of the   youth justice 'journey'.
•  To provide performance data that supports a wider understanding of trends and themes and of impact of YJ  contribution
•  Understanding of the contribution and value of YJS partners to the YJ EIS 
• Ensure Youth Justice is a signed up member to the wider LSCB, CSP and partnership boards and committees across the piste and that we make a valid contribution to those fora.
Lead service responsible for meeting this priority.  
Senior management YJEIS. 
Children services HOS.
Chair of the management board/ director of social services 
By when- Ongoing and integral to the role and function of the YJEIS.
Expected / desired outcomes:
Increase the profile of the YJEIS.
To be an integral part of the strategic picture and strategic developments across the LA.
To improve partnership working.  
To contribute effectively to local and national developments in Youth Justice. 
15. DOMESTIC ABUSE
• Service engagement with young people involved in domestic abuse
• To increase confidence in identifying domestic abuse in relation to young people in the YJEIS
• To ensure evidence of identification of domestic abuse in assessment and planning
• To establish quality, recognised domestic abuse interventions to meet the needs of individuals and families 
• To ensure understanding and a clear evidence base in relation to the needs of young victims of domestic abuse and to support improved outcomes
Lead service to meet this priority.
Youth Justice and early intervention service.
Children services. 
Police 
By When: immediate and ongoing as an integral part of managing risk, safeguarding and good practice. 
Expected/ desired outcomes. 
To ensure our young people are kept safe and where domestic abuse is an issue it is responded to appropriately. 
To ensure appropriate interventions for the victims of domestic abuse. 
To work with our partner agencies to address issues of domestic abuse whether our young people are victims or perpetrators. 
To contribute effectively to MARRAC and MAPPA where domestic abuse forms part of the profile of our young people. 



Ali Davies
Principal Officer NPT YJEIS. 4/09/2019 
This plan covers a twelve-month period only and is written to meet the needs of many audiences in addition to the official bodies requiring its completion and submission. 




Signed:	...................................................	Date:	
		Chair YOS Management Board

Appendix 1
Post Inspection Operational and improvement plan.





1


