 
 
                                    
Oxfordshire: Youth Justice Service 
YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN 2019 - 20 (Refresh) 
 
Contents 
1. Foreward 2. Introduction 3. Priorities, Structure and Governance 4. Resourcing and Value for Money 5. Partnership Arrangements 6. Youth Justice Performance Outcomes  7. Children, Families and Victims of Crime Voices 8. Risks to Future Delivery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.   Foreward 
Welcome to the Oxfordshire Youth Justice Service (henceforth known as Oxfordshire YJS) strategic plan for 2019-20. It amplifies the priorities and strategic intent in the Oxfordshire Youth Justice Plan for 2018-211. For a broader understanding and development of the partnership and service within the last year, both plans should be read in conjunction with each other.  
This refreshed plan is produced in accordance with the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, Section 40 which stipulates the following: 
"It shall be the duty of each local authority, after consultation with the relevant persons and bodies, to formulate and implement for each year a plan (a "youth justice plan") and is consistent with the principle aims of the Youth Justice System, namely: 
• Prevent Youth Crime 
• Reduce Re-offending 
• Safeguard young people from harm 
• Protect the public from harm  
• Repair the harm caused by youth crime"  
The Oxfordshire YJS management and governance structures continue to evolve, enabling the service to achieve these notable successes as outlined in 1.1 in the last years strategic plan. The strategic intent set out in the 2018-21 plan remains the direction of travel for 2019-
20. Lara Patel, Deputy Director of Children's Services continues to be the Chair of the Oxfordshire YJS Board. This leadership consistency continues to drive the evolution of the Oxfordshire YJS as it moves forward. 
Oxfordshire YJS continues to face the challenges of increased and competing demands in ways that are innovative and forward-thinking.  Whilst the financial settlement for this year has remained broadly the same as last year, the increase in serious youth violence and exploitation in its many guises is demanding a re-think of how Oxfordshire YJS delivers its core services. Oxfordshire YJS is responding to this developing and evolving need to safeguard children as victims of crime and exploitation, as well as delivering on our statutory duties around public protection and prevention of offending. There are similar pressures across all our partner agencies.  We are working hard with partners to ensure that we continue to provide a high-performing service to young people and communities and maintain the levels of supervision, risk-management and safeguarding which will protect the public and support young people to stop offending and from being exploited. 
As always, the Oxfordshire YJS Board is extremely grateful for the dedication of our Youth Justice Service in supporting children, families and victims of crime. 
 
2. Introduction  
2.1 Any major in-house changes 
There have been no in-year changes to governance arrangements for the Oxfordshire YJS. The service remains within the multi-agency Oxfordshire Youth Justice partnership. The Oxfordshire YJS Board has senior officer level representation from statutory services and third sector to inform strategic decision-making, monitoring overall performance and facilitate resource allocation where required. Chair of the board is Lara Patel, Deputy 
Director of Children's Services, who is also responsible for the line-management of the YJS Manager.   
 
2.2 National standards 
The new national standards for Youth Justice Services were published in April 2019 and are intended to replace those written in 2013. The Oxfordshire YJS is currently reviewing what these mean for the service and will move towards implementation in early 2020. The Oxfordshire YJS Board will be prioritising this area at the next management board which sits in September. 
 
2.3 Major challenges / achievements  
• Oxfordshire YJS has taken the County strategic lead for exploitation and is influencing the strategic and operational direction for the local authority. The Oxfordshire YJS has been a key partner in the development of Oxfordshire's Safeguarding Children's Board's Exploitation Pathway. 
• During April-June 2019 Oxfordshire YJS worked again with The Oxford Trust, Science and Ideas Festival to run a creative project working with young people from Oxford and known to the service who are at risk from drug supply and exploitation. The work that has been undertaken will be part of a television documentary that helps children tell their story regarding their experience of drugs exploitation in Oxfordshire. 
• The development of good practice within Oxfordshire's YJS regarding the traumabased approach with our health colleagues is well underway. This includes our caseformulations in collaboration with Forensic CAMHS and the use of Liaison and Diversion. The aim is to be prepared for the roll-out of the clinical-psychology informed method of Trauma Informed Case Management by the YJB across England and Wales by adopting a trauma-based approach in the treatment of young people with adverse childhood experiences and complex trauma, which constitutes a significant proportion of the YJS case-load.  
• The production of two YJS tool-kits (knife crime and building resilience). The Knife crime tool kit has received positive reviews from other YJS's and is regarded as excellent practice as well as being presented on the YJB's national effective practice resource hub. The Substance Misuse and Exploitation Team within the YJS has developed a toolbox 'Building Resilience' aimed at providing strategies around how to deal with risky situations and raising awareness of exploitation.  
• The establishment of a weekly joint decision-making panel for all Out of Court Disposals which has resulted in improved communication with partner agencies, clearer processes and a more collaborative approach which has enhanced decision making. 
 
2.3.1 Audits 
Oxfordshire YJS has undertaken 4 audits and scoping exercises: 
• Benchmarking against HMIP self-assessment inspection framework in October 2018   
• Oxfordshire Safeguarding Board Out-of-court disposal audit 
• Voice of Oxfordshire Youth (VOXY) audit on young people who engage in harmful behaviour    
• Audit of victim work. Understanding how victim's needs and wishes and victim safety are incorporated into assessments and intervention plans, which led to a service workshop. 
• CDE Scoping exercise between YJS and Children's Services (see section 6.5) Oxfordshire YJS carried out a pre-inspection audit, using the first draft of the HMIP inspection Framework. The quality assurance process focused on four principal areas of case management; assessment, planning, service delivery and reviews. Feedback in respect of quality assurance and management oversight was also explored. Within the context of these areas, key aspects of case management were examined, which included risk-management in terms of harm and serious harm posed to actual and potential victims, safety and wellbeing in relation to the risk of harm to self and the overall likelihood of re-offending, which remain the principal aims of the Oxfordshire YJS.    
	i. 	Benchmarking against HMIP Criteria: Findings 
We completed a bench marking exercise against the new criteria which has resulted in a drive to enhance the skills of the workforce.  The management team has responded by developing ongoing quality assurance process which has included the following: 
• Comprehensive introduction which incorporates training around HMIP criteria 
• Implementation of a quality assurance process which is a 15-day check of practitioners' assessments to allow staff time to amend the work before this is signed off by managers.  
• A number of internal workshops on planning, Out of Court Disposals, repairing the harm have been delivered to address some of the aspects of the Asset+ framework  
• Guidance documentation regarding assessment, planning and reviews.  
• One-to-one meetings with the Oxfordshire YJS Team Managers and their staff have also been completed to provide feedback from the audit and to implement individual action plans. This has also enabled managers to gain a better understanding of the Asset+ framework. Furthermore, one-to-one feedback meetings regarding the development of these areas has also been undertaken with the Head of Service for Oxfordshire YJS to ensure that the actions have been tasked-oriented and remain pertinent to the findings.    
• Weekly operational to imbed this practice. 
This benchmarking exercise has helped us to inform our training needs for the service for this year. To illustrate, given the complexity of need and risks of the children we are working with Oxfordshire YJS we will continue to develop our trauma-informed practice approach this year. We have built on our work from last year regarding Trauma informed work. This has included two days training and a visit to another well established YOT, to focus on trauma-informed practice and adverse childhood experiences.   
 
	ii. 	Oxfordshire Safeguarding Board Out of Court Disposal Audit  
Key Strengths: 
• 100% of YJS cases fully explored restorative approaches/ considered victim's views 
• 85% of YJS plans supported improved education and social/emotional wellbeing 
• Child's voice heard in assessment and informs planning in 77% YJS cases Areas for Development: 
• YJS cases: 50% of exit plans fully evidenced joint-planning with partner agencies 
• Of the cases that were open to Children's Social Care at the time 33% YJS evidenced joint planning.  
 
Because of the findings of this audit, Children's Social Care and the Oxfordshire YJS are undertaking another audit to understanding if practice has improved in this area. These findings will then be shared with the Oxfordshire YJS board.  
	iii. 	VOXY Audit 
In last year's plan we also identified that was an audit planned for young people who engage in harmful behaviour. This audit topic was selected by VOXY2 because of the issues that they felt were pertinent to their current experiences.  Members of VOXY spoke about issues which had arisen in schools regarding young people, where the members felt that these young people may go on to display harmful behaviour.  They were interested to understand what joint preventative work is done and how effective it is. The multi -agency audit found that on an individual case by case basis most children within Oxfordshire YJS had their voices were being and listened too. 
 
	iv. 	Findings from Newham Serious Case Review regarding Exploitation (Chris) 
 
This serious case review was published in August 2018 regarding the sad death of a child because of criminal exploitation. The findings and learning, whilst relating to all the partners involved, had specific areas of practice for the Newham Youth Justice team. We have discussed this area in our Leadership Team meetings and we are looking to undertake a workshop for the wider team in the summer to understand how we can incorporate the learning into our own current service model. As a result, we are developing a learning space around this case to better understand the key points raised about and what learning opportunities we can take into consideration moving forward.  The SCR outcomes emphasised the importance of a holistic, risk and needs-based assessment and this has been reinforced by our audit work more broadly. From a wider perspective, the on-going development of a joint Exploitation Service during 2019-2020, will mean that the 14 recommendations from this Serious Case Review will be woven into shaping how this service will develop in the future.  
 
	v. 	Conclusion  
 
These audits have given us a clearer picture of the service and the impact it is having on all areas of the work. Whilst there are clearly strong areas of work there remains areas for development, particularly in relation to using wider partnership plans to inform our work and capturing more systematically from a service perspective the views of children, families and parents. We now have a comprehensive service improvement plan that is addressing these areas for improvement and we are well placed to deliver positive outcomes for children.  This plan has been signed off by the Oxfordshire YJS board to which we are accountable. 
 
3. Priorities, Structure and Governance 
 
The Priorities, Structure and Governance arrangements remain the same as last year. 
3.1 Priorities for the Next Year 
 
There will be 4 additional operational priorities for 2019/20 that will build on the 4 strategic priorities established in last years plan 3 -year strategic plan. 
 
Strategic priorities 2019/20 
1. Prevent Offending and Re-offending  
2. Exploitation of young people. Ensuring that the OYJS is shaping any future service design 
3. Greater use of data across the partnership to understand the key priorities 
4. Imbed the work of Oxfordshire YJS Board 
Operation Priorities 2019/20 
1. Custody and Remand. There has been a slight year on year increase in both our custodial and remand data. As a result, we will be undertaking a reflective learning review to generate knowledge and imbed best practice. This shall be reported to the YJS Board. 
2. Education Training and Employment:  Understanding our data more accurately to target and focus our resources more effectively.  
3. Disproportionality of BAME in our Youth Justice system. Initial use of the YJB disproportionality tool has improved our understanding of how our BAME children are being treated in the youth justice system. Further analysis will be undertaken to explore what are the ways to respond to the needs for this cohort. 
4. National standards 2019 audit.  
 
 
 
3.2 Structure 
The Oxfordshire YJS is co-located with the Local Authority's Child Sexual Exploitation Service, Kingfisher. This close physical proximity enhances closer working practices given the similarities in the profile of work between the two services. This is supported by the Oxfordshire YJS Manager who is the strategic lead for child drug exploitation (CDE). 
The structure of the Oxfordshire YJS and its governance arrangements will be reviewed in 2019-20 to respond to the emerging risks and needs around criminal exploitation, particularly focussing on the wider partnership response to reducing youth violence (including knife crime) and reducing drug and alcohol misuse (including the use, supply and distribution as well as the exploitation of younger age groups into becoming involved). 
 
3.3 Governance 
It was recognised in the Oxfordshire YJS plan (priority 4) the need to improve the workings of the Oxfordshire YJS Board; despite having one or two long-standing members, the inclusion of new members has meant that this iteration of the Board was still in its infancy.  During 18/19 the Board undertook the following:  
• Completed a self-assessment against HMIP inspection criteria domain 1 (Organisational Delivery). 
• Included additional members to be more reflective of the YJS partnership. The new members are from the Office of the Police Crime Commissioner, Education, Safer Oxfordshire Communities Partnership, Magistrates and the community sector. 
• Established an induction process and handbook which includes support for new members.  
• Enhanced focus on performance management and created a new performance dashboard. 
• Undertook two away-days with the Board and the YJS staff that promoted increased awareness and understanding of individual and collective roles. 
4. Resourcing and Value for Money 
4.1 Funding 
Funding for Oxfordshire YJS for 2019/20 is made up of contributions from statutory partners, the YJB and the Police and Crime Commissioner's Community Safety Fund. A full list of contributions that make up the overall Oxfordshire YJS budget is shown in the table below.  
The Youth Justice Board grant is the single biggest contributor to the Oxfordshire YJS budget. 
Agency Staffing costs 
(£) Payments in kind 
- revenue (£) Other delegated funds (£) Total (£) Local authority*   322,625   322,625 Police Service (PCC) 86,141     86,141 National Probation 
Service 21,914  5,000   26,914 Health Service 35,000   
   35,000 Safer Oxfordshire 
Communities 
Partnership   
  226,913 226,913 
  YJB Youth Justice 
Grant (YRO Unpaid Work Order is included in this grant)  552,860 552,860 The YJB grant we receive for 2019/20 will be £552,860 as shown in Table 1 "Partner contributions to the Youth Justice Partnership pooled budget 2019/20". 
The majority of our spend in 2019/20 will be on staffing. Our staffing spend will be in excess of £1m. The YJB grant is not allocated to specific posts, as it is a pooled budget as recognised in the funding table in 4.1. 
Table 1: Partner contributions to the Youth Justice Partnership pooled budget 2019/20 
 

 
*(The Local Authority also provides additional resources including management oversight; administrative, ICT and finance support; premises; facilities management; ICT equipment and specialist human resources support and advice) 
The National Probation Service seconded 0.6 Probation Officers to the Oxfordshire YJS during 2019-20 and contributes a management fee of £5K. 
Health staff contribution has remained the same for 2019-2020.  
Police staff contribution has remained the same for 2019-2020 
Education 
 
Young people subject to Oxfordshire YJS intervention have their education, training and employment needs fully assessed. Our close working relationships with the wider partnership means that once they have been assessed they are supported by the Oxfordshire County Council's Education, Employment & Training Service. The Head of Education Learner Engagement sits now on the YJS Board and any issues regarding service gaps are escalated to her.  
 
The staffing spend will be on the posts detailed in 4.2 Staffing.  These posts fulfil the purpose of the YJB grant and therefore the Oxfordshire YJS Partnership will fund the budget for 201920 as detailed above and his will maintain the staffing requirements as set out in the Crime and Disorder act 1998. 
 
Financial Risks 
	• 	Non-staffing costs may fluctuate and exceed the allocated amount for each area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2 Staffing  
Type of Role No of Staff Gender Ethnicity Service Manager 1 Male British Asian Operations manager 2.6 Male - 0.6 
Female- 2 White British Senior Practitioner  2 Male - 0 
Female -2 White British Senior Practitioner 
(RJ) 1 Male White British YJS officer 11 Male - 4 
Female - 7 White British- 10 
Other- 1 Probation 
(seconded) 0.6 Female- 0.6 White British Police (seconded) 2 Male -1 
Female-1 White British Health (seconded) 1 Female White British Substance worker Misuse 1.5 Male -1 
Female - 0.5. White British Restorative worker Justice 1 Female British Muslim Reparation coordinator 1 Female White British Volunteers coordinator 1 Female White British  
The total number of staff 2019-20 including secondments:  25.7 FTE.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Partnership Arrangements 
5.1 Working with the Voluntary Sector 
We work closely with statutory partners and those in the voluntary sector to deliver a range of specialist interventions aimed at reducing risk. 
Through our close working relationship with Safe! we are supporting the delivery of "Respectful Families", a child-on-parent violence group work course that aims to reduce violence in the family home.   
Additionally, we are working with specialist community sector providers to support our work with children and families who are being exploited. Such services which include the Willow Project and Step-out, enhance and complement our work to keep children and families safe in our communities.  
We are also working with our colleagues in the community sector to bid for funding to prevent youth crime, through the Youth Endowment Fund. We are looking to use this opportunity to build a consortium of multi-agency providers, delivering interventions through the implementation of Oxfordshire Safeguarding Children's Board's exploitation pathway. 
5.2 Prevent  
Local Authorities, including Youth Offending Services are subject to a duty under section 26 of the Counter-Terrorism and Security Act 2015, to have "due regard to the need to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism". This is known as the Prevent Duty. In Oxfordshire YJS this duty is discharged through our case work with young people. The Oxfordshire YJS 
Manager is the Prevent lead for the Children's, Education & Families Directorate and represents the Directorate on the Channel panel. 
5.3 Case-management: Managing risk 
All cases assessed as high or very high- risk are subject to a County Risk and Safety and Well Being Panel. Our Risk Panel is based on the principles of the Level 2 MAPPA meeting. The purpose of the panel is to share information, assess risk, develop the plan for managing risk and agree on a process for reviewing that plan. Panels are chaired by Oxfordshire YJS operational managers, with representation from Oxfordshire YJS Police, Children's Social Care, Probation and Forensic CAMHS. Other attendees are invited by the case manager/practice manager.  
MAPPA cases are identified at the point of sentencing. All MAPPA eligible cases will be referred into the Risk Panel process. The Risk Panel will then make a decision as to whether the risk can be adequately managed by the panel process or whether the case should be referred into MAPPA, with a view to being managed at either Level 2 or 3. 
 
5.4 Custody and Resettlement 
Oxfordshire YJS follows the YJB custody and resettlement guidance as set out in section 7 of the Case Management Guidance: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/custody-and-resettlement/custody-andresettlement-section-7-case-management-guidance 
In doing so Oxfordshire YJS works closely with our partners including the Youth Custody Service to ensure that sentence planning considers the voice of the Child/Young Person, their needs and risks, to develop appropriate community interventions that supports desistance factors.  
Oxfordshire YJS case manager is responsible for overall case management of both the custody and community elements of the sentence but will be jointly accountable for sentence planning with the Secure estate. In the case of Detention and Training Order DTO and other custodial sentences for example, Young people subject to Detention and Training Order (DTO) who attain the age of 18 while subject to a DTO will remain under the supervision of the YJS. For those subject to s,90, s.91, s. 226 and s. 226B appropriate Youth to Adult transitional arrangements will be put in place 3 months prior to the young person 18th birthday. The YJS case manager will ensure that these young people are flagged to the Probation secondee.  
These interventions include ensuring that resettlement plans are considered at the outset and take account of the young person's accommodation, education, employment and training, substance misuse & mental and physical health needs. It is recognised that due to the cost and lack of suitable affordable accommodation within Oxfordshire, accommodation continues to be an area that requires further development and is likely to impact negatively on desistance. To this is Oxfordshire YJS is currently engaging locally with the Local Authority's supported accommodation pathway (which is being re-commissioned this year), to ensure that our young people receive the appropriate support for their accommodation needs following custody.   
 
 
 
5.5 Partnership Working and Safeguarding 
Oxfordshire YJS has robust procedures in place to identify and assess risk in relation to safeguarding young people. Our overarching policy for safeguarding is the Public Protection Policy and Safety and Wellbeing Policy as noted above. During this year, we continued through our risk panels to highlight the correlation between Child Sexual Exploitation (CSE) and Drug Exploitation.  Our mandated assessment tool Assetplus is completed in relation to 100% of cases with statutory involvement and there is an expectation that these assessments take a holistic approach to address vulnerability and safeguarding concerns relating to young people. Screening for exploitation risks, diversity, health, speech, language and communication needs is also undertaken to assist with assessment, engagement and to improve safeguarding outcomes for young people.   
The multi-agency Risk Panels outlined above are critical in safeguarding children by ensuring appropriate interventions and planning are in place.  Additionally, we support the specialist CSE Kingfisher Team by ensuring that we are a part of the extended team, making referrals to the team where appropriate and been involved in undertaking case mapping exercises and supporting Social Care colleagues in case formulations.    
We have had no serious safeguarding incidents, as defined by the YJB, this year.   
Case-holders and specialist workers have monthly supervision in which the safeguarding of children is discussed and recorded on the ChildView Case Management System. Risk levels in relation to vulnerability are reviewed, agreed and signed off by a manager at key stages; this includes the countersignature of assessment, safety and wellbeing planning and PreSentence Reports. Plans are in place for all statutory Orders and there is an expectation that case-management systems are updated within 24 hours.  Case studies are now routinely shared with the Oxfordshire YJS Board, to demonstrate the complexity of work involved and any issues the board can help to resolve.  The Oxfordshire YJS Manager is an active member of the Complex Case panel, a multi-agency senior management group that aims to unblock, support and resolve difficult and high-risk cases.  
For young people at risk because of their involvement in County Lines or are at risk of drug exploitation, Oxfordshire YJS, as part of the sentencing planning, follows safeguarding procedures including if appropriate an early referral to the National Referral Mechanism (NRM). This is an area which is subject to a current development initiative between YJS and 
Kingfisher team to develop a joint exploitation service  
Wider learning from the Oxfordshire YJS is disseminated through representation at the Performance, Audit, Quality and Assurance subgroup for the Oxfordshire Safeguarding Children's Board. 
5.6 Partnerships and Public Protection   
Oxfordshire YJS have worked closely with Thames Valley Police in producing data for the Knife Crime Report. We are working closely with the Police Problem Solving Team to share intelligence and collaboratively produce robust risk management plans for children at risk of causing harm to others and themselves. Oxfordshire YJS has been a key partner in creating and delivering the strategic aims of Oxfordshire's Violence and Vulnerability Delivery Plan. We are also working closely with Children Services around risk management planning in advance of young people accessing our service.   The Oxfordshire YJS is part of the 'Community around the School' Offer and provides support and advice to schools that have concerns around knife crime. The Oxfordshire YJS is an active member of the Oxfordshire Community Safety Partnership, providing updates on work relating to the Violence and Vulnerability Plan and sharing partnership updates with the YJS.   
 
6. Youth Justice Performance Outcomes 2018/19 
 
6.1 Numbers of offences and young people who offended 
 
The number of substantive offences by young people in Oxfordshire reduced in 2018/19 with a 6% decrease on the previous year.  There were 4 more disposals in the same period as last year and 7 more young people offended. This equates to 0.4% of the 10-17 population in Oxfordshire offending.   
Violence (33%) and Criminal Damage (14%) continue to be the most prevalent offences.  However, there was a rise in the proportion of young people with drug-related offence to 14% of all offences. 
13% of offenders in this period were female; they were responsible for 27% of Criminal Damage and 30% of domestic Burglary offences. 
18% of all substantive offences were by children aged 14 and under, which is a reduction from 24% in the previous 2 years. 
 
6.2 Disproportionality  
There remained an over-representation of young people (compared with the general 10-17 population) from Black (+5%), mixed-heritage (+4%) and Asian (+1%) backgrounds in the Youth Justice System in Oxfordshire. This data had led us to use the YJB Ethnic Disproportionality Tool to understand this cohort more clearly. The Ethnic Disproportionality Tool provides information about how members of all ethnic groups, including those from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) groups, were represented in the Youth Justice System in England and Wales in the years ending March 2012 to March 2018. The tool also includes information on the local 10-17 ethnic groups profiles.  
The data is drawn from the Youth Justice Application Framework (YJAF) data based on YOT quarterly returns to the YJB, and from 2011 census. 
The aim of the tool is to assist Youth Justice Teams in addressing any issues of overrepresentation of particular ethnic groups in their local youth justice systems and enables the sharing of such data with other key stakeholders in local criminal justice systems.  
Key initials findings:  
• In Oxfordshire YJS young people from a white ethnic background accounted for 75% of all young people receiving a Youth Caution or Court conviction in the year ending March 2018. Those from a Black ethnic background accounted for 7%, those from an Asian ethnic background for 5% and those from a mixed ethnic background for 9%. 
• There is a decline in white young people receiving a criminal justice outcome over the last 6 years  
• The most over-represented ethnic group are Black young people. They make up 7% of the youth justice population compared with 2% of the 10-17 population in Oxfordshire  
• Black and Minority Ethnic population are more involved in serious offences such as Knife Crime 
An action plan has been finalised to respond to this are and will be shared with the Oxfordshire YJS Board. 
 	 
6.3 Performance against the National Indicators 
 
A summary of how Oxfordshire YJS performed against the 3 national indicators (and the number of remands into custody) is outlined below. These indicators are applied to all Youth Offending Teams within the country and are nationally determined. 
 
a. Reducing the number of first-time entrants (FTE) to the youth justice system 
 
The latest published data in this indicator is for January to December 2018.  There were 126  First-time Entrants to the Youth Justice System in Oxfordshire (rate of 205 per 100,000) which is a 14% reduction on the previous year. This is against a national rate of 238 and 174 for our statistical neighbour group average. 
319 Youth Restorative Disposals, Youth Cannabis Warnings and Youth Cautions were administered over the year. A further 39 young people were in receipt of a Youth Conditional Caution.  This is not a nationally published indicator therefore no comparative information is available. However, local data shows that these disposals have reduced over the last year.  b. Reducing reoffending  
The table below shows the latest published reoffending period compared with the same period in the preceding year.  Reoffending rates are calculated using a 3-month cohort of young people tracked forward 12 months. Oxfordshire has seen a significant improvement since the last period and performs better than all comparative groups. 
 
Reoffending rates after 12 months (3-month cohort) Oxfordshire South 
East Thames 
Valley YOT 
family  England Apr 17 - Jun 17 27.0% 36.7% 33.9% 29.3% 38.1% Apr 16 - Jun 16 44.7% 43.3% 41.0% 42.2% 41.4% Change -17.8% -6.6% -7.0% -12.9% -3.3%   
c. Reducing custody 	 
 
There were 11 custodial sentences in the year out of a total of 145 Court sentences. This equates to 7.6% and is a rate of 0.21 per 1,000 of the 10-17 population.  It is an increase on the previous year in which there were 9 custodial sentences. The performance was better than the national average (0.30) but below that of the regional and statistical neighbours (0.17). As explained above his deviation from our statistical neighbours is a key operational priority will be explored in depth this year to understand the reasons behind this. 
 
d. Remands into custody 
12 young people were remanded to custody in the period out of 67 eligible bail episodes (conditional bail and above).  This equates to 18% and is a rise in the rate from the previous year when were 12 episodes out of 77 bail episodes (16%). This is a local indicator and recent comparative data is not available currently. 
 
6.4 Interface with Children's Social Care  
 
Of 61 young people on the YJS caseload on 31st March 2019: 
• 51% were open to Children's Social Care 
• 27% were Looked After or Leaving Care 
• 3% were subject to a Child Protection Plan 
 
A Criminal Drug Exploitation Scoping exercise between YJS and CSC established the following on the 20 children that were clearly identified as being involved in CDE: 
In 80% of the children screened the two characteristics present in the children were: 
• Exclusion/suspension from school or unexplained absences from or not engaged in school/college/training/work 
• Drug /Alcohol misuse with no obvious means of payment 
 
In 50 % of the children screened the following multiple characteristics were present:  
• Majority of the children are White British  
• 68% were males  
• Multiple missing episodes 
• Breakdown of family relationships 
• Lack of positive role models 
• Expression of fear/anxiety 
 
7. Children's, Families and Victims of Crime Voices  
 
Both operational management and the Board recognised that feedback from children and victims of crime needed to become more systematic across the service.  This coincided with the development of the YJB Participation Strategy in 2019. A local Participation Policy is being developed which incorporates the key aspects of this national policy.  Quarterly snap-shots of children's views are now in place and reported to the board. Responses from our children and families include: 
• 'They helped me through difficult times' 
• 'I liked reparation'  
• 'I have sorted my life out' 
• 'Helped me with my behaviour' 
• 'It has completely changed the way I behave for the better and has made me a much better person'  
• 'Helped me with my anxiety and how to get on with people' 
 
Victims of crime who have been involved with the YJS are also invited to complete an online questionnaire. In the last 12 months, 100% of victims who responded felt that they were given enough information to understand the role of the Restorative Justice Service, 92% felt that their involvement in the service had made a difference and 77% would recommend the service to other people (with another 12% possibly recommending it to others). Asked about satisfaction with the restorative justice process on a scale from 1 - 10 (with 10 being satisfied) the average score was 7.8. 
 
'It has restored my faith in the justice system. I could tell the young person has learnt from his mistakes and agreed to do the reparation work I suggested. This is a positive outcome.'  
 
 
 
 
8.Risks to Future Delivery 
 
The Oxfordshire YJS has had a financially stable year. This has been most welcomed given the preceding years of change and uncertainty.  The service has innovated, changed and responded to local need and given serious consideration to how the YJS partnership responds to the significant emerging risks that our children in Oxfordshire face in the form of County Lines and serious organised crime and violence.  To respond to the issues of criminal exploitation, there will be a review of the current service structure that will incorporate the expectations of the new National Standards for Youth Justice. 
 
Lara Patel  
Chair of Oxfordshire Youth Justice Services Board 
1 The Youth justice Plans: YJB Practice Note for Youth offending Partnerships 2019 explains that whilst Statute requires a the production of an annual plan, the YJB welcomes plans that are longer in length . Plans covering more than one year will require an annual refresh which includes updates on governance and finance. 
2 Voice of Oxfordshire Youth - a multiagency partnership of young people across Oxfordshire  
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

1 
 

1 
 

1 
 

