




PLYMOUTH

ANNUAL YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN
	
2019-2020




















          




Plymouth Youth Offending Team
2019 - 2020 Plan


Contents

Executive Summary	3
Introduction	4
Summary of Achievements	6
Response to Thematic Inspections	6
2018 - 2019 Youth Justice Plan	7
Key Developments	9
Structure and Governance	10
Resources and value for money	13
Partnership arrangements	17
Opportunities and Challenges	19
Joint Youth Justice Plan objectives for Devon, Plymouth and Torbay 2019-2020	21

Appendix - 1 Plymouth Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board Terms of Reference	29
Appendix - 2  Regional Youth Justice Partnership Board Terms of Reference	32
Appendix - 3 Structures	35
Appendix - 4 Risk Register	37





Executive Summary
Plymouth Youth Offending Team (PYOT) has not undergone any significant structural changes in the last reporting year; however, we are awaiting the outcome of a service wide review that will involve further changes being implemented for the team during this reporting year. PYOT management has undergone some significant changes which has been a challenge for the staff group. The long standing Team Manager left the authority and another practice manager has taken a 1 year sabbatical however, we have been able to retain a high level of consistency for the team through this period of change due to the second Practice Manager within the structure being able to step up into the Team Manager role. Recruitment is underway for the permanent Team Manager replacement.
A key change that has taken place this year is the YOT's Governance arrangements. The YOT Senior Management; Head of Service and Service Manager report directly to the local Community Safety Partnership (CSP) - Safer Plymouth, through the Safer Board and the Safer Executive and are therefore able to regularly report and brief the CSP of local trends and escalate areas of concern including gaps in service which the partnership can support, as well as offering a good level of support and challenge with regard to Plymouth Youth Justice Services.
 
This is an exciting time for the YOT as the CSP is currently reviewing all existing structures and governance arrangements to develop a more consistent approach to how the partnership work together with a focus of;
•	Reducing violence, abuse & exploitation
•	Reducing re-offending
•	Early intervention & prevention of harm
•	Building community resilience & improving lives

The CSP are also supporting the Trauma Informed Plymouth Network to develop Plymouth as a trauma informed City, this will provide a new vision for community safety in which preventing the causes of adversity becomes the cornerstone of how we collectively build a safer future for the children and young people of Plymouth. This vision fits well with Youth Justice Services particularly for the more vulnerable cohort such as those children who are looked after or in need of protection. The CSP will achieve sign off for their new arrangements in September 2019 through the Health and Wellbeing Board.

Following the change in governance arrangements Plymouth YOT now have a quarterly local Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board which reports directly to the Safer Plymouth Executive the Terms of Reference are included within appendix 1. 
Plymouth continue to report to the Pan Devon strategic partnership board on a quarterly basis and we continue to work together on many peninsula developments such as training and funding through joint bids. This year we have also worked together to produce joint youth justice plan objectives for the reporting year 2019/2020 which are included in this document.
2019 also brings Plymouth YOT into their 4 year HMIP inspection cycle. Plymouth were last inspected back in June 2015 so preparations are well underway to ensure we are able to showcase the outcomes for children and young people that are achieved through the provision of Youth Justice Services.

Introduction
The Youth Justice Plan sets out the governance arrangements and operation of Plymouth Youth Offending Team (PYOT). This report highlights agreed key developments and key priorities for the coming year, 2019 - 2020 
PYOT continue to sit within a wider Targeted Support Service. Targeted Support incorporates; Family Intervention Project (FIP), Family Support, Targeted Youth Work (inc. missing CE and youth homelessness), Early Help, Family Group Conference and Mediation Services.
The YOT remains a statutory multi-agency partnership between Plymouth City Council, Devon and Cornwall Police, National Probation Service and Health (Livewell) Under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, this team is responsible for the delivery and/or commissioning of statutory/non statutory Youth Justice Services.
The YOT and wider targeted support services are committed to providing high quality youth justice services, in partnership with other services such as health, the police and probation.
In June 2019, Plymouth's youth justice population of 10 - 17 year olds was 52,400 which is 19.9% of the population.
31.1% of children and young people live in poverty 
13.8% of children are classed as persistent absentees from school  
Current data shows that 357 children and young people are home educated
Caseload diversity - within the 12 months up until 01 April 2019, PYOT worked with 120 children and young people, 86% identified themselves as white British, 23% were female and 28% were either currently or had previously been known to Children's Social Care Services.
During the reporting year 2018 - 2019, there were 23,729 crimes committed in Plymouth, which is a 4% increase from 2017 - 2018.
The level of offending over the last 2 years has decreased. 2018 - 2019 Plymouth reported 181 children/young people. In the previous reporting year (2017 - 2018) 215 children/young people.
Key Performance Indicators:
Plymouth's performance has improved; the data below is taken from YJB National Data June 2018. These figures are measured over the period April to December 2018.)
(*Plymouth is placed in a comparison group of similar YOTs by the YJB for comparison purposes. The other YOTs in Plymouth's group are Wrexham, Torbay, Portsmouth, Southend-on-Sea, Isle of Wight, Newport, Rotherham, Sheffield, Conwy and Denbighshire, Medway)
Custody:   
Plymouth did see a spike in its custody rate this year, largely due to 2 young people receiving consecutive custodial sentences and 2 young people committing serious sexual offences. The figure released by the YJB in June 2019, a rate of 0.38 per 1000 of the 10 to 17 population. Whilst reducing from a high of 0.7, this rate is still higher than the South West rate of 0.12, the YOT comparison group of 0.31 and the national figure of 0.32.
Remand costs during 2017-18 were greater than the remand budget supplied by the MOJ/YCS to cover these costs, with an overspend of £90,080.00
Reoffending:  
During the past two years the MOJ and YJB has changed the way in which reoffending is measured, looking at cohorts over 3 months rather than 12 months. This has altered the basis on which the figures are calculated and makes long-term comparisons difficult.
Binary reoffending is expressed as the percentage of offenders who reoffend within 12 months of their intervention coming to an end. Plymouth's latest binary reoffending rate is 28.6%, which is below the rate for the South West (34.2%), and for the YOT comparison group (40.2%) and the national rate (39.6%).
The frequency reoffending rate is how many offences are committed each, on average, by the young people who reoffend as detailed above. Plymouth's rate is 3.9 which has reduced over the year from 4.78, however this is higher the South West figure of 3.71, but below the YOT comparison group's figure of 4.2 and the national figure of 3.91. 
We have identified how the majority of our re-offending takes place in the first 3 months of an order and we have increased the frequency and type of intervention during this period, it is pleasing to see the re-offending rates fall in this period.
First Time Entrants (FTE):   
Whilst the number of FTEs has fallen from 349 over the year, the current rate of FTE measures 305 young people per 100,000 of the 10 to 17 population. This compares to a rate of 278 across the comparison group of similar YOTs, a rate of 252 across the South West and a national rate of 250.
It is a concern that the first-time entrants figure remains high. Two important actions have been taken to seek to reverse this trend: the setting up of Out of Court Disposal (OOCD) Panels, and a police pilot in two areas to consult more widely before making a decision that results in a young person becoming a first time entrant. Both these actions seek to introduce wider packages of support to young people at risk of offending at an earlier stage, and it is anticipated that these will result in better, more targeted services to young people.
In June 2019, 2,089 children were open to CSC services, with 417 children with a looked after status.
2018/2019 has seen PYOT launch its early help and prevention work, this has enabled children, young people and their families to receive early help and prevention based programmes with a direct focus on whole family need at the earliest stage of criminal and/or anti-social behaviour being displayed. YOT workers are undertaking whole family early help assessments which is helping us build a rich data set that will in turn help us understand whole family need for this cohort to reduce first time entrants into the criminal justice system.
In May 2019, we began using Viewpoint Surveys. The surveys are being used at the midpoint and end of orders to ascertain feedback from young people and parents to assess how we work. The yearly results from this showed CYP do not understand their plans and find them confusing. As a result, we have adopted a new Intervention Plan template that has been designed by Children and Young People.
Summary of Achievements
In the past 12 months PYOT has embarked on a number of new initiatives to address local assessed need such as;
* The creation of a multi-agency Out of Court Disposal (OOCD) Panel which meets weekly.
* Agreeing a protocol with PCC commissioned care providers and others to seek to reduce offending by young people placed in care settings.
* PYOT have appointed a victim worker who is now contacting all known victims and offering a bespoke programme of support which is led by the victims. This now ensures that the victims' voice is heard and recognised with all cases.
* Viewpoint point surveys to ascertain feedback from children and young people.

Response to Thematic Inspections
In the last 12 months Plymouth YOT has reviewed practice in light of the HMIP Thematic Inspections for;
Out of Court Disposals; work in youth offending teams - Plymouth YOT reviewed all policies and procedures relating to this area of work and implemented an out of court disposal scrutiny panel which includes a lay person and a victim liaison officer. Prior to the scrutiny panel taking place an asset plus assessment is completed with the young person and their family and this is presented to the panel to help with decision making.
Referral Orders - do they reach their potential? - Plymouth YOT have met with local magistrates and the magistrates have also reviewed areas of work undertaken by YOT, their partners and panel members. All new referral order assessments are quality assured by management and this year we have appointed a victim worker to ensure the voice of the victim is clearly heard and considered within any referral order contracts. 

Work of Youth Offending Teams to Protect the Public - Plymouth YOT are working alongside the Trauma Informed Plymouth Network and will be designing all future interventions with a clear acknowledgement of where trauma would have influenced heavily on the behaviour of children and young people who have entered the youth justice system. Following a review of Asset plus plans and taking feedback from young people, Plymouth YOT have now designed a new intervention plan to ensure young people are engaged and aware of the expectation on them through their plans. This year Plymouth will be introducing risk management review panels to ensure we are effective in our work and responsibilities for protecting the public. We are also reviewing our staff training matrix to include trauma led practice as well as the impact social media is having on young people.
Plymouth YOT have also implemented the new Referral Order Guidance and reviewed our approach to National Standards in light of the release of the New National Standards framework that was released in April 2019.
In August 2018 Plymouth Devon and Torbay undertook a peer review in light of the new HMIP inspection framework. This was a positive learning experience for Plymouth and identified weaknesses around our intervention plans, as a result we have now introduced a new child friendly intervention plan that has been endorsed by the YJB and approved by local magistrates.

2018 - 2019 Youth Justice Plan
Plymouth YOT identified 14 key areas within its 2018/2019 plan that needed to be developed, or implemented. The following section describes the areas for improvement identified in the 2018/19 plan and the progress and achievements made throughout the year.
1. The implementation of Youth Rehabilitation Order (YRO) review panels offering a multi-agency reviewing platform where intervention plans will be developed in collaboration with young people and their families. Incomplete; This piece of work remains a priority however, in light of the thematic inspection relating to Referral Orders and the new Referral Order Guidance, we prioritised our direct focus on setting up the scrutiny panels for all Referral Orders. This learning will help us with achieving the YRO review panel this coming year.

2. Undertaking case audit reviews focussing on National Standard 8, Planning and Delivering Interventions in the Community. Completed; an action plan has been implemented and we have seen improved performance across this standard especially in areas such as management oversight.

3. Continue to further embed PYOT quality assurance framework. Completed; This activity is now a mature piece of work and continues to be utilised.

4. PYOT procedures to be aligned with the new CapitaONE system. Completed; CapitaONE system is now business as usual.

5. Implement view point (E survey). All young people will be undertaking this survey at the beginning and end of their orders. Participation with young people will be overseen by the speech and language specialist to make sure that it remains user friendly for all young people entering the service, prevention and statutory. Completed; We have worked closely with the Viewpoint developer and created an application to capture young peoples feedback, this is currently used at the end of every order, following use to date we now want to be able to use this application at the mid-point of an order so that we can be more dynamic in our approach to improve our service offer to young people.

6. Increase education, employment and training opportunities for young people involved in the criminal justice system with a particular focus on children in the care of the local authority. Incomplete; This work is ongoing. PYOT have seen improved performance in this area, however, this is largely due to improvements in case managers recording of education, employment and training activity. We are working with our colleagues from education to improve the offer to children statutory school age as well CSW for our 16+ cohort.

7. Continued development of Early Help and Prevention incorporating a whole family approach. Completed; This is now fully implemented including the use of Plymouth's Early Help Assessment Tool (EHAT).

8. PYOT to be seen as a priority for updated IT roll out as current case management system requires an upgrade in its operating system to address current performance reporting. Phase 2 of The Way We Work Programme is due to be implemented for the YOT by August 2019.

9. For PYOT to develop and implement a process for out of court disposals with the development of a decision making panel to agree appropriate level of interventions to match the disposal. Completed; This has been in place since December 2018, PYOT have now agreed to follow a Devon and Cornwall wide approach for these panels following an agreement between the local YOTs and the area Police Force so we are all taking a consistent approach to this work.

10. Following recent RJ training PYOT now need to implement changes to practice to ensure they are consistent with restorative justice principles. Completed; PYOT now have a Victim worker in place who is co-ordinating this approach

11. To develop and implement the Enhanced Case Management Model for those young people who meet the criteria collaborating with Family Intervention colleagues to ensure an intensive whole family wrap around approach is available to these families where appropriate. Incomplete; PYOT are able to provide wrap around services to this cohort through our FIP model when appropriate. Plymouth has also developed an active trauma informed partnership network, with a vision for Plymouth to become a Trauma Informed City. PYOT are committed to the core values and standards and are working with the network to ensure a trauma informed approach is taken to our enhanced case management model further work and training is planned for this area to be completely embedded in our practice so this will be a continued priority within this year's plan.

12. Review policy and procedures alongside children social care colleagues to ensure those young people engaging in sexually harmful behaviours are assessed and receiving appropriate support via a timely and effective Aim2 assessment. Incomplete; This work remains a priority for PYOT however due to staff and management changes we now need to get staff trained and/or receive a refresher to incorporate the updated AIM3 alongside a review of policy and procedures.

13. Review pathways for criminal justice support and prioritise prevention opportunities for those young people who are in the care of the local authority. Completed; This is now fully implemented

14. To implement learning from the inspection Peer Review that was held between Plymouth Torbay and Devon. Completed
Key Developments
* This year PYOT has further developed PYOT management oversight and quality assurance process and this process has led to improved consistency of practice. Performance this year has improved greatly in areas such as timeliness of assessments, identification of unsigned intervention plans and management oversight. Supervision of staff now consistently follows a set quality assurance focus and we can ensure that staff remain focussed on the young person's needs throughout their interventions

* Out of court disposal scrutiny panels are now well established within the YOT process. Children and young people are now being appropriately dealt with ensuring that the right intervention is in place at the right time. It is hoped this, as well as a police pilot in two areas to consult more widely before making a decision that results in a young person becoming a first time entrant, will reduce the rate of first time entrants. Plymouth will now be using the learning from these panels to assist with implementation of our YRO scrutiny panels.

* Sexually harmful behaviour work/AIM - following a review of staff training, we have identified the need to update YOT staff to AIM3. As a result, we are coordinating this training regionally to be undertaken in Autumn 2019 as within Children Services YOT are seen as the lead when this level of assessment needs to be undertaken with children and young people.

* PYOT victim worker is continuing to enhance the victim service offer. Plymouth are able to offer a bespoke programme of support which is led by the victims this ensures that the victims voice is heard and recognised within all cases. 

* All YOT Policy and procedures have been reviewed and updated as part of our inspection preparations.

* PYOT have now developed and implemented view point survey which is offered to young people at the mid-point and end of statutory interventions. The tool has been endorsed by speech and language professionals to ensure that we are offering all young people who access youth justice services an opportunity to have their say. All feedback received can then help us improve our engagement and offer to children and young people.

* PYOT prevention programme continues to develop and all practitioners now undertake Early Help whole family assessments with those families who have been referred through early help and targeted services such as Schools and Health professionals. Prevention programmes include areas such as; healthy relationships, sexting, consent and internet safety, anti-social behaviour, emotional regulation, behaviour management and victim awareness. The programmes are undertaken on a one to one basis or delivered in groups. We are currently developing pathways for more structured parental engagement as this area is currently weak for the team and needs to be addressed with some urgency especially for those young people who are at high risk of escalating into the CJS.

 
Structure and Governance
In Plymouth, the local Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board (YJPDB) is the multi-agency partnership where agencies can oversee the future development of Plymouth Youth Justice Services and monitor the delivery of Youth Justice and Prevention services within Plymouth. The YJPDB reports directly to the Community Safety Partnership (Safer Plymouth) and sits within their governance structure (see appendix 3). Any issues that are highlighted as a risk to delivery would be escalated to the Safer Board for consideration and action where necessary.
Plymouth YJPDB meets quarterly and looks at local youth justice and prevention issues; this includes staffing, budgets, delivery models, new local initiatives and signing off the annual Youth Justice Plan. In addition, there is a Youth Justice Pan Devon Strategic Partnership Board that meets quarterly and includes Plymouth, Devon and Torbay local authorities. This board looks at topics such as; sharing effective practice and investigating joint funding opportunities. It ensures that comparing, challenging and learning can take place across the three YOT's and also supports the YOT's in overcoming barriers to effective multi agency working/partners contribution
A core focus within both agendas shall be placed on: 
* Performance and Quality Assurance 
* Planning, Delivery and Outcomes 
* Resources 
* Service Development
At this stage, it is not proposed to develop a single youth justice plan or performance report to cover the three authorities. Rather, participating local authorities retain accountability for both. However, this may develop as the work of the joint board matures, and subject to further approval from participating local authorities.
The relationship between the two boards is summarised below:

PAN DEVON STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP BOARD
1. Compare, Challenge and Learn from Practice & Performance to advise collective activity
2. Share Effective Practice
3. Investigate best value "joint funding" opportunities
4. Investigate consistent practices to reduce variance and improve statutory partners performance/engagement across the 3 LA's
5. Attendance of senior partners who have a footprint wider than the individual YJ Management Boards
6. Horizon scan and recommend future relationships and structures for YJ Delivery in the three LA's 
7. Core Attendance of the 3 Local YJ Management Board Chairs - the 3 YJ Strategic Managers - Senior Police Representative - Senior PCC Representative - Senior NPS Representative - Senior Health Representative
Support Staff - Data Manager - Minute taker - YJB (Advice and Oversight Role)
DEVON YOS MANAGEMENT BOARDCOMMUNITY SAFETY PARTNERSHIP BOARD (CSP)COMMUNITY SAFETY PARTNERSHIP BOARD (CSP)PLYMOUTH YOS MANAGEMENT BOARDTORBAY YOS MANAGEMENT BOARDChair (attends Pan Devon also)
YOS Manager
Finance Officer
Data/Performance Manager Role

Local Senior Staff in Police/Health/Probation/Education/Children Services/Community Safety/Courts/Housing/Elected Member
(as appropriate)

Core Activity
1. Address Local Performance Risks and Issues
2. Comply with YJB Conditions, NS and HMIP Inspection Requirements
3. Monitor YOS Management/Staff Operations 
4. Enhance partnership working at the LA level with a range of non-statutory local partners
5. Oversee the local prevention diversion agenda (Child First)
6. Fiscal Management & Agree Budgets/Resources
7. YJ Plan Development/Sign off
8. Monitor Serious Incident learning
 
Chair (attends Pan Devon and CSP)
YOS Manager
Finance Officer
Data/Performance Manager Role

Local Senior Staff in Police/Health/Probation/Education/Children Services/Community Safety/Courts/Housing/Elected Member
(as appropriate)

Core Activity
1. Address Local Performance Risks and Issues
2. Comply with YJB Conditions, NS and HMIP Inspection Requirements
3. Monitor YOS Management/Staff Operations 
4. Enhance partnership working at the LA level with a range of non-statutory local partners
5. Oversee the local prevention diversion agenda (Child First)
6. Fiscal Management & Agree Budgets
7. YJ Plan Development/Sign off
8. Monitor Serious Incident learning
Chair (attends Pan Devon & CSP)
YOS Manager
Finance Officer
Data/Performance Manager Role

Local Senior Staff in Police/Health/Probation/Education/Children Services/Community Safety/Courts/Housing/Elected Member 
(as appropriate)

Core Activity
1. Address Local Performance Risks and Issues
2. Comply with YJB Conditions, NS and HMIP Inspection Requirements
3. Monitor YOS Management/Staff Operations 
4. Enhance partnership working at the LA level with a range of non-statutory local partners
5. Oversee the local prevention diversion agenda (Child First)
6. Fiscal Management & Agree Budgets/Resources
7. YJ Plan Development/Sign off
8. Monitor Serious Incident learning

(1) Plymouth & Torbay LA Joint Working Developments are advising governance arrangements - Some crossovers and efficiencies of children's services and YOS services may merge some responsibilities going forward

Membership
The core membership of the Plymouth Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board comprises the agencies identified within the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.
* The Local Authority (including local Social Care and Education functions)
* Health
* Police
* The Probation Service 
Agency representatives shall be sufficiently senior in order to contribute to board discussions, subject to their own governance and decision-making arrangements on substantive matters.
Please see Appendix 1 for Terms of Reference for the Plymouth Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board.
Please see Appendix 2   for Terms of Reference for the Pan Devon Strategic Partnership Board.

Please refer to Appendix 3 for Operational Leadership and structures.
Plymouth YOT is located within Plymouth's Children, Young People and Families Service (CYPF). This reflects the significance of the YOT work across the spectrum of need as within this service area sits Early Help, targeted and prevention services as well as children's safeguarding and social work services such as child in need, child protection and LAC.
Early Help/ Troubled Families; Plymouth have combined the Troubled Families agenda together with Plymouth's Early Help arrangements. Early Help has robust governance arrangements and a strategic Governance Board that meets regularly to drive this partnership agenda forward the YOT Service Manager and Head of Service are key members of this board
Safeguarding: Through supervision and management oversight of casework, safeguarding issues are identified and YOT staff attend meetings for children in need of help and protection as part of multi-agency working arrangements. They also attend child protection and core group meetings on all open cases. In response to the Short Quality Screening Inspection in July 2015, the YOT moved to develop a system of more robust supervision and quality assurance, both of which were developed with particular emphasis on the wider areas of vulnerability. The YOT Service Manager is responsible for safeguarding and for escalations within the service, and chairs multi-agency meetings for those assessed as having high or very high vulnerability. YOT has an escalation policy in place with Children's Social Care Services, and staff complete relevant safeguarding training in line with the requirements of Plymouth Safeguarding Children's Board (PCSB). YOT staff provide information to the MASH/safeguarding hub on a daily basis, regularly complete safeguarding referrals. In addition, YOT management form part of the membership at the local Missing and Child Exploitation meetings. The YOT are also part of all multi-agency safeguarding audits.
Public Protection: Public Protection and Risk of Serious Harm are identified through assessment, supervision and quality assurance, which are all being strengthened in the current year. The YOT has a comprehensive risk management policy and relevant cases are reviewed and monitored through Risk Management Panels. These panels also review cases of high vulnerability to ensure safeguarding is also monitored at a multi-agency level. Relevant cases are referred to MAPPA and the YOT works closely with partners in the police to review intelligence and ensure measures are in place to protect the public, including named and vulnerable victims, through controls such as licence conditions and relevant elements of orders.   

Resources and value for money  
The YOT 2018/19 final out-turn position resulted in an overall surplus of (£177,953).  This included a balance of (£148,681) from the 17/18 reserves, less an in year withdrawal of £67,500 = (£81,181).  There were additional savings of (£96,772) during 18/19 equating to a total reserve of (£177,953).



The table overleaf shows a breakdown of the final out-turn position.





















COST CATEGORIES £Expenditure (based on CIPFA Standard Groups)  Employees  726,132Premises                               0Transport  18,599Supplies & Services   10,410Third Party Payments 2,878Other Delivery Costs                               0    757,988YOT FundingYouth Justice Board Grant(358,198)Plymouth City Council (372,797)Police and Crime Commissioner (85,119)Probation (5,000)Health (33,646)Other Income0TOTAL YOT Funding  (854,760)Total underspend

Balance of 16/17 cumulative reserves
SURPLUS (Balance to YOT Reserves) (96,772)

(81,181)
(177,953)
Partnership Reserve Funder April 2018   £'000 The YOT Reserve at the end 
 of 2018-19 LA 112 Police and Crime Commissioner 43 Probation 7 Health 16 TOTAL 178As at 31/3/2019 the total YOT reserves were (£148,681) which was carried forward into 2018-19.  An in year PCC withdrawal of £67,500 was agreed to help with pressure = (£81,181).  
A surplus of (£96,772) was achieved during 2018-19 resulting in a cumulative YOT reserve of (£177,953).  

The YOT Budget 2019/20
Areas of the Public Sector continue to face financial challenges in 2019 and beyond and this is reflected in the resources available to the YOT.  Management action has already taken place to ensure that the YOT can contain its spending plan within the forecast resources available for 2019-20.
Youth Justice Board 
The YJB Grant has remained at the same level at £358K in 2019/20 (compared to £358K in 2018/19).  This consists of £339K main grant and £19K Junior Attendance Centre Grant.
Police Crime Commissioners (PCC)
The Police Crime Commissioner has confirmed their contribution of £85,120 for 2019-20.  This has remained at the same level as the 2018-19 contribution. 
Probation
The 2019-20 level of funding is projected to be £5,000, as per the 2018-19 level of funding.
Health
The 2019-20 level of funding is expected to remain at £33,646.
Plymouth City Council
The 2019-20 level of funding is the same as per previous years at £372,797.
Table 3 - 2019/20 Forecast		                    Table 4 - 2019/20 Funding
Expenditure          Latest Forecast 19/20Employees                                            775,570          Premises                                                          0Transport                                               19,950Supplies & Services                                5,833Third Party Payments                            1,000Other Delivery Costs                            50,982Total Expenditure                                 853,335      Confirmed 2019-20  Funding £'000sYouth Justice Board356,772Police Crime Commissioner85,120Plymouth City Council 372,797 Probation     5,000Health   33,646     Total Funding853,335         
	    






The Plymouth YOT is committed to the following principles
* maintaining appropriate levels of front line delivery of both preventative and core statutory services to young people and partners
* ensuring the YOT remains in a position to improve practice and outcomes for young people and that they are involved in the developments of the service.
* ensuring young people are safeguarded and any risk is well managed
* ensuring value for money 
   
These principles underpin all of our budgetary management.
The YOT Budget 
The YOT budget comprises partnership funding, YJB funding and specific grant funding. The Management Board reviews the budget allocation annually and all partners agree funding contributions for the following year. The budget for 2019-20 is £853,335 (subject to no reductions in contributions from Partners).   
90.9% of the YOT budget is spent on staffing costs.  
2019-20 Forecast expenditure breakdown
   
 REDUCTION IN YOUTH RE - OFFENDINGREDUCTION IN FIRST TIME ENTRANTSREDUCTION IN THE USE OF YOUTH CUSTODYCONTRIBUTION TO YOUTH DRUGS ALCOHOL PREVENTION TOTAL% split of forecast expenditure60%15%20%5%100% £££££Employees465,342116,336155,11438,779775,570Premises00000Transport11,9702,9933,99099819,950Supplies & Services3,5008751,1672925,833Third Party Payments600150200501,000      Other Delivery Costs30,5897,64710,1962,549            50,982  0000 Total 19/20 Forecast Expenditure512,001128,000170,66742,667853,335Partnership arrangements 
Objective: Effective partnership arrangements are in place between YOT statutory partners, who have a stake in delivering local youth justice services, and wider partnerships to generate effective outcomes for children and young people who offend, or are at risk of offending.
The YOT Senior Management; Head of Service and Service Manager report directly to the local Community Safety Partnership (CSP) - Safer Plymouth, through the Safer Board and the Safer Executive. The CSP is currently reviewing all existing structures and governance arrangements to develop a more consistent approach to how the partnership work together with a focus of;
•	Reducing violence, abuse & exploitation
•	Reducing re-offending
•	Early intervention & prevention of harm
•	Building community resilience & improving lives

The CSP are also supporting the Trauma Informed Plymouth Network to develop Plymouth as a trauma informed City, this will provide a new vision for community safety in which preventing the causes of adversity becomes the cornerstone of how we collectively build a safer future for the children and young people of Plymouth. This vision fits well with Youth Justice Services particularly for the more vulnerable cohort such as those children who are looked after or in need of protection. The CSP will achieve sign off for their new arrangements in September 2019 through the Health and Wellbeing Board.

PYOT sits within Targeted Support Services, Children, Young People and Families, alongside Family Support, Targeted Youth and Family Support, Family Intervention Project (FIP), Family Group Conferencing and Mediation, a Duty Team and The Plymouth Children's Gateway (front door). The proximity of these teams has provided opportunities for closer collaboration and co-ordination of early help and prevention for children and young people, with a particular focus on taking a whole family approach to assessing need and formulating plans. 

External partners include
* Criminal Justice (Police, Police & Crime Commissioner, Probation, Courts);
* Community Safety (Health, Fire Service and ASB Team);
* Children's Services (Targeted Support Service, Education & Children's Social Care);
* Housing Services;
* Local Safeguarding Children's Board (LSCB);
* Plymouth Safeguarding Adults Board (Via NPS, Police and LA Members); and
* Local MAPPA Board and delivery group. 

The Police, Probation, Education, SHARP (Substance Misuse Service), CSW, Health-Livewell and Youth Justice Board offer either financial support and/or co-location of key specialist staff within PYOT.

* Plymouth YOT staff have carried out work with Unaccompanied Asylum-Seeking Children during the past 12 months. This work is designed to assist these young people to settle, to broaden their understanding of the law and to lower the risk of offending behaviour.

* The Counter-Terrorism and Security Act 2015 placed a duty on YOTs and key partners to have due regard to the need to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism and extremism. Plymouth YOT is represented on appropriate forums regarding these issues, and most staff have undertaken 'prevent' awareness training. A Practice Manager is responsible for providing information regarding young people known to the YOT whose names are raised, through the Channel system, as potentially at risk of being drawn into extremist activities. The YOT has worked with a small number of cases through this process, both where the YOT has referred the young person into the Channel system and where the YOT has been asked to assist by other agencies.

* We currently have 34 trained Appropriate Adult Volunteers and offer this service, Monday to Friday between the hours of 9am to 5pm. Cover outside of these hours is provided by Children Social Care Out of Hours Team.

* Two Child Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) workers are co-located within Plymouth Youth Offending Team providing specialist support to young people exhibiting emotional wellbeing and mental health issues. The need for the support is identified by PYOT case holders, via the Mental Health screening tool within the Asset Assessment. By working together emotional wellbeing and mental health support can be provided in a timely and effective way. 

* Speech and Language Therapist (SALT). All young people coming into the service are now screened for speech and language issues and if appropriate young people are then referred on to the therapist for a full assessment. Following assessment a Speech and Language Report is produced and direct work undertaken by the therapist or strategies are identified for the family and young person to use. 

* PYOT staff and a SHARP (substance misuse) worker offers targeted support work for young people, either on court orders or as a preventative measure, by engaging in a constructive leisure activity


Opportunities and Challenges
Plymouth YOT is in the process of a wider service redesign which involves the whole of Targeted Services, plans are due to be implemented in the autumn.

Prevention work undertaken by the YOT is now clearly sited within the wider Early Help service, meaning that prevention of offending is rightly a target for wider networks of professionals within the Early Help system. Plymouth YOT has become more embedded within wider children's services allowing closer working relationships with Children's Social Care and Accommodation. 

Plymouth YOT uses the Capita database to record cases. This is an improvement on our previous system in terms of speed and reliability.  AssetPlus case assessment tool is used and through supervision, QA and audits, the quality of AssetPlus recording is improving. This year, the staff were trained to use the Early Help Assessment Tool, we are using this assessment for prevention cases.

New challenges: 
New standards for children in the youth justice system were introduced in April 2019 and Plymouth YOT, alongside other YOTs, will have to benchmark themselves against these standards during the period from September 2019 to March 2020, before producing an action plan to address any gaps in adherence that were revealed. 

Like many other similar Local Authorities, Plymouth has had to deal with an increased number of cases of young people being exploited through so-called 'County Lines' processes. Initially, this involved young people, largely from major cities, being arrested in possession of large amounts of drugs. We are gaining intelligence that more Plymouth young people are now being drawn into County Line activities. Multi Agency protocols within the city are being utilised to ensure that these young people are protected. Protocols involve referrals to the Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) and the National Referral Mechanism to ensure that the safety of these young people is at the forefront of any discussions and plans. 

The Junior Attendance Centre offers interventions to young people through Court Orders and sentencing plans as well as young people who have been identified through our Prevention pathway. We offer centre-based programmes for groups of young people to challenge their offending behaviour and to offer training to increase their skills. We have had an ongoing issue with attendance, following feedback from young people, we currently run the attendance centre on a Wednesday afternoon instead of Saturday mornings as a trial to see if compliance improves.

Joint Youth Justice Plan objectives for Devon, Plymouth and Torbay 2019-2020

Target AreaOutcomeActionsSuccess CriteriaTarget date National Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)Reduce the number of FTEs (First-time entrants) to the criminal justice system





Devon: OOCD panels have met weekly since December 2018. These panels have already reduced FTE numbers (not reflected in the figures yet, as they are from September 2018) and are expected to continue to do so.
Plymouth: Multi agency OOCD panels have met weekly since February 2019, too early to assess the impact on FTE at present.
Torbay: Desistance work with both prevention and post-court cases. Ongoing work with specialist providers, the local college and partners to reduce the numbers of young people receiving a substantive outcome. Obtain a data-sharing with the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) to better understand the discrepancy in reported figures. (Currently all requests are on hold, but this remains a priority.)
Across all three areas: Police pilot which will involve individual officers having to take advice from a youth specialist within the police before acting to make a young person a FTE will commence in June 2019.Overall: FTE figures to reduce to below the South West rate (measured as FTE per 100,000 young people). 
Devon current rate 256, South West rate 236
 Plymouth current rate 305, South West rate 236
Torbay current rate 366, South West rate 236
Note: Devon and Cornwall Police will provide local FTE data from June 2019 which will enable more local scrutiny of these figures.

Ongoing.



June 2019.



June 2019.National Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)Reduce both measures of 
re-offending: binary (the proportion that re-offend) and frequency (the number of offences committed by each re-offender).All: These figures date to March 2017 and are therefore over 2 years old. More up-to-date local data will be obtained through the LiveTracker tool and through local police, to better analyse trends and take necessary action.
All three areas are undertaking trauma recovery model training in September-October 2019, with the intention of being able to deliver an enhanced case management approach to the most risky and challenging young people. 
Devon: Ensure that there is minimum delay in commencing interventions.
Ensure that young people with highest YOGRs score (highest risk of reoffending) are given the most impactful programmes of work.
Overall: Binary re-offending to reduce to below the average in the South West or to remain below this figure
 Devon: current figure is 37.8% 
 target is 34.1%
Plymouth current figure is 27.6% 
 target is 34.1%

Torbay current figure is 31.0% 
 target is 34.1%

Frequency re-offending to reduce to below the South West average  or to remain below this figure
Devon: current figure is 5.00 
 target is 3.90
Plymouth current figure is 4.29 
 target is 3.90

Torbay current figure is 2.96
 target is 3.90June 2019










Ongoing - monthly dip samples in place.National Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)Continue to achieve low level of young people sentenced to custody.Devon: Robust alternative to custody proposals will be presented to court in cases where custody is likely.


Close working relationships to continue with local Social Services departments to ensure supportive placements are provided for young people.
Being remanded to custody can make it more likely that a custodial sentence is imposed subsequently. Therefore, work will be carried out to ensure that remand placements are kept to a minimum.
Appropriate placements will play 
a part in reducing demand for custodial sentences. Clear working practices will be established with Social Care regarding provision of suitable accommodation for those in danger of/leaving custody.
 All remands to custody will be examined in supervision, to check 
whether alternative placements in the community would suffice.
In Plymouth, whilst above the South West average, the figure is falling and was the result of a small number of young people persistently reoffending and not complying as well as two young people who, whilst LAC, were not known to the YOT when they committed their offences
Torbay: Current processes and practices regarding accommodation for those leaving custody to be reviewed by the Management Board and Children's Services Senior Leadership Team.
Plymouth: implement YRO multi agency review panels where intervention plans will be developed in collaboration with children, young people and their families - with an aim to improve compliance reduce risk of custody 

Custodial rate to remain below the South West rate, measured as a proportion of every 1,000 young people in the 10-17 population.
Devon: current figure is 0.05 
 target is 0.11
Plymouth current figure is 0.38 
 target is 0.11

Torbay current figure is 0.18
 target is 0.11








Ongoing



Ongoing
Ongoing





























December 2019Reduce offending by Looked After Children in DevonOffending by Looked After Children is reduced.New protocol covering all three areas launched in June 2019:
"A protocol covering Devon, Plymouth and Torbay to reduce criminalisation of Children and Young People in Care"
Devon: 'Bounceback' project targeting offending by children in care commenced January 2019.
Torbay & Plymouth: Task and Finish Group to be created to implement recommendations from the protocol and be sighted by the local Management Board.
Plymouth: Increase education, employment and training opportunities for young people in the CJS with a particular focus on LACData to show reduction in offending by Looked After Children.'Bounceback' service commenced January 2019











October 2019


Ongoing from 2018/2019Self-assessment against new standards for children 2019 baselineSelf-assessment carried out in each area against new standards for children 2019 baseline, the results of this will form the basis of the Youth Justice Plan 2020/21.Devon: Self-assessment to be carried out by a group of Team Managers in Devon YOS

Plymouth: Self-assessment to be carried out by the YOT Managers between September 2019 and December 2019.

Torbay: Self-assessment to be carried out by a group of managers in Torbay YOT.
Self-assessment successfully produced and plan to address any gaps in adherence created. Self- assessment across all three areas to be moderated to a comparable standard to ensure consistency.Self-assessment to take place between September 2019 and March 2020Feedback gathered from service users (young people, parents)Feedback gathered from service users to be used to improve services to themDevon: Young person's feedback form at the end of orders plus parental feedback through parenting workers. AssetPlus closing surveys for both young people and parents. 
Plymouth YOT have been working with Viewpoint and developed an app to gain feedback from Young People on their experiences with us. Feedback is taken at the midpoint and end of an order and has already identified young people's confusion with their intervention plans. 
Torbay: Ongoing implementation of feedback across all areas of the service to improve practice and provision. (Parents/carers, victims, courts, young people.) Clear evidence that the services are responding to feedback from young people and parents and using this information to improve services offeredOngoingCreate disproportionality  strategy


Put strategy in place to counteract disproportionality in criminal justice outcomesTrack BAME through OOCD panel process to work towards fair and balanced outcomesIn year ending March 2018 Devon had a 5% over representation of BAME young people. The target is to reduce this to at least 3%.
Similarly, Plymouth had an over-representation of BAME young people of 5% and the target is to reduce this to 3%.
No issue of disproportionality was identified in Torbay. Review HSB policy and procedures alongside CSC colleagues Ensure those young people engaging in HSB are assessed and receiving appropriate support and interventions  via a timely AIM 3 assessmentPlymouth: staff to be trained in AIM3 

 Review HSB/ safeguarding policy and procedures alongside CSC colleaguesClear evidence of a timely assessment and response to children and young people displaying  HSB/ or offending September 2019

December 2019












Appendix - 1 Plymouth Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board Terms of Reference

Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board
(April 2019)

Terms of Reference

Background
Over recent years there has been increasing financial constraints upon public services that has led local partners to explore new ways of working. A Regional Joint Board made up of Plymouth, Torbay and Devon Local Authorities, Police, Health, Probation and other non - statutory partners has been created to provide youth justice governance and consistency across these areas.

Where appropriate the three areas will work to collaborate to deliver services where there is a clear need to do so, especially around the YOT's statutory function and with developing and future proofing agreed youth justice policy and strategy for the wider area 

However each Local Authority area is funded separately with their own objectives and responsibility for submission of their statutory youth justice plan which includes service requirements to be delivered to meet local needs.

Governance
In Plymouth, our Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board (YJPDB) is the multi-agency partnership where agencies can oversee the future development of Plymouth Youth Justice Services and the delivery of Youth Justice Early Help and Prevention within Plymouth. The YJPDG will report directly to the Community Safety Partnership (Safer Plymouth) and sit within their governance structure (see appendix 3).

The Plymouth Youth Offending Team (YOT) is a specialist multi-agency team within Children Young People and Families Service Plymouth City Council. The YOT is managed by a Team Manager reporting to Service Manager. 

The principle aim of the YOT is set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998:
o To prevent offending by children and young persons 
o In addition to any duty to which they are subject, it shall be the duty of all persons and bodies carrying out functions in relation to the youth justice system to have regard to that aim.

The principle duty under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998:
o To co-ordinate the provision of youth justice services for all those in the local authority's area who need them
To carry out such functions as are assigned to the team or teams in the youth justice plan formulated by the authority 
The YJPDB member's responsibilities are: 

o Having oversight of the Youth Justice Budget which is in place to deliver the Youth Justice Plan in Plymouth. The CSP provides the overall financial governance for the budget

o Securing the appropriate financial, estates, personnel, strategic planning and data management in accordance with national and local legislative and policies/procedures such as; National Standards

o Ensuring that the work of the Youth Offending Team and Youth Justice Services are integrated into relevant local Plymouth partnerships and there are clear lines of communication with the Plymouth CSP 

o Contributing to the Youth Justice Plan for recommendation to partner agencies prior to final submission to the Youth Justice Board.

o Ensuring that core staffing is retained from the statutory agencies, and systems are in place to maintain continuous staff secondment.

o Ensuring that the work and development of the Youth Offending Team is given a high profile within all partner agencies and within Plymouth, through effective marketing to improve public confidence in the Youth Justice System.

The Plymouth Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board will receive the following reports

1)	Financial report (detailing budgets and current and projected spending)
2)	Key Performance Indicators (to cover KPIs reported by the Youth Justice Board)
3)	Other local authority measures agreed through the Plymouth CSP and areas of interest agreed with the         Pan Devon Board
4)	Any additional reports requested by local partners to improve practice
5)	Take reports on community safeguarding, public protection incidents in the local area
6)	Coordinate and report on the annual National Standards Self-Assessment process

Membership
Membership is to be made up of senior operational managers who are able to make decisions without having to refer back or up within their organisation. Core membership of the Youth Justice Prevention and Delivery Board should be made up of direct funding partners, such as:
•	Plymouth City Council - children's services
•	Plymouth City Council - Education
•	Health (Livewell)
•	Police
•	The Probation Service

The delivery group may also appoint or request other agencies or services that support young people and families, such as voluntary organisations or interest groups, to attend on an advisory basis, or to contribute to the business and/or decision making of the group.

Records of Meetings
Records of meetings will be kept and circulated to YJPDB members/chair of the CSP 

Frequency of Meetings
The JYPDB will meet a minimum of four times a year on a quarterly basis in July, October, January and April to align with the local performance reporting cycle to YJB and following the Regional YOT Board Meeting.

Quorate
The meeting will be considered quorate with at least 3 of the 4 core funding partners being in attendance.

Chairing
The Youth Justice and Prevention Delivery Board will be chaired by CYPF Head of Service. A Deputy Chair will be identified by the delivery group to cover the Chair's functions as and when required. 
* 2019/20 Deputy Chair was agreed as Inspector Simon Hardwick (Devon and Cornwall Police)

Review
The YJPDB Terms of Reference will be subject to an annual review following inception of the group.

















  


Appendix - 2  Regional Youth Justice Partnership Board Terms of Reference

Joint Youth Offending Service Management Board: Devon, Plymouth and Torbay Terms of Reference

Background
Over recent years the continuing and significant reductions in Central Government funding have required local authorities and their partners to explore new ways of working in order to deliver efficiencies whilst seeking to sustain/improve services.  The ongoing process of structural reform has created further challenges, particularly for strategic partners working across a number of local authority areas.

Youth Justice is particularly challenging in the  latter  regard  with the  requirements placed on Police, Probation  and  Health for  statutory participation  within  both delivery and governance across  multiple local authority areas.


The  joint board  has been proposed  as a mechanism through  which local agencies can continue to  play an active  role  within youth  justice governance  whilst seeking  to  provide  a greater degree  of coordination  of effort  across  a wider  geographical area. The impetus to create a joint board   is further   informed   by similar   patterns    of offending behaviour   across   the participating local authority areas.



It should  be  noted  however  that  each  participating authority   retains  responsibility for  local youth  justice delivery and  outcomes,  and  their  youth  justice plan, including approval  of the latter   through  their  respective   decision  making processes.       It  is not  proposed   to  move towards   pooling  of  budgets  although  the   opportunities  to  share   resources  and  achieve efficiencies will form a key part of the Board's work.


Purpose
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 brings together a range of local agencies within Youth Offending Teams with the following aims:

It shall be the principal aim of the youth justice system to prevent offending by children and young persons.

In addition to any duty to which they are subject, it shall be the duty of all persons and bodies carrying out functions in relations to the youth justice system to have regard to that aim.

The principal duties of the Youth Offending Service are set out in Sec 39 (17) of the Act as follows:

• To coordinate the provision of youth justice services for all those in the local authority's area who need them: and

• To carry out such functions are assigned to the team or teams in the youth justice plan formulated by the authority.


The  joint board  has been established to being together senior  representatives from each local authority  (and  their  YOS  Managers) along with statutory partners,  in order to  provide for efficient oversight  and scrutiny  of YOT  performance at an individual local authority  and area wide level, whilst also seeking opportunities to address  common areas of concern,  patterns  of offending behaviour and the development of shared  resources.


Membership
The core membership of the Joint Board will comprise of the agencies identified within the
Crime and Disorder Act 1998:

* The Local Authority (including local Social Care and Education functions)
* Health
* Police
* The Probation Service

In light of the extensive programme of structural and legislative reform that has taken place since the 1998 Act, the initial membership of the joint board is proposed as follows:

* Chair- Torbay Director of Children's Services
* Devon County Council  DCS  (or their representative)
* Plymouth City Council  DCS (or their representative)
* YOT Manager (I each LA)
* National Probation Service
* Community Rehabilitation Company
* Devon and Cornwall Police
* Clinical Commissioning Group
* Careers South West
* Youth Justice Board
* Devon and Cornwall Police and Crime Commissioners  Office

Agency representatives shall be sufficiently senior in order to contribute to board discussions, subject to their own governance and decision making arrangements on substantive matters.

The joint board still meet on a quarterly basis in July, October, January and April in order to align with local performance reporting cycle.

The  meeting shall be considered  quorate if  at  least two  out  of the  3 local authority  senior representatives and three out of five core  partners are in attendance.

All meetings shall be minuted and papers will be circulated at least 5 working days prior to each meeting.   Items for each agenda shall be agreed by the chair in consultation with DCS colleagues and statutory partners.  Torbay Council YOS will provide administrative support to the Board.

A core focus within agendas shall be placed on:

* Performance and Quality Assurance
* Planning, Delivery and Outcomes
* Resources
* Service Development

At  this  stage,  it  is  not   proposed   to  develop  a  single youth   justice  plan  or   report   on performance  at  a  tri-borough   rather   than  local authority   boundary  and  participating local authorities  remain accountability for both.  However, this may develop as the work of the joint board matures and subject to further approval.


Functions
The core functions of the joint board will be to:
* Provide effective oversight and scrutiny of performance against key indication across each LA, with a particular focus on:

o New entrants to criminal justice
o Reoffending
o Use of custody
o Health, education, employment project outcomes

* Review progress against each local justice plan, checking any area of underperformance and identify areas for collaborative working/joint focus.
* To oversee the development of local justice plans prior to joint youth board and local approval, with the aim of moving to a single, multi-area youth justice plan at the earliest opportunity.
* To ensure resources (financial, personnel, infrastructure, etc.) are sufficient to deliver the requirements of local youth justice plans, monitoring expenditure and seeking to identify efficiencies whenever practicable.
* To monitor compliance with Youth Justice Board national minimum standards.
* To ensure local Youth Justice work informs and is, in turn, informed by wider multi agency working with children and families, with a particular focus of child safeguarding.
* To  communicate  the  work  of  the  youth  justice system  to  the  public, partner  and stakeholders  with  particular  regard  to  the  victim's voice and  the  need  to  promote public confidence.























Appendix - 3 Structures

Community Safety Partnership (CSP)




Plymouth City Council Structures




Targeted structure 

Plymouth Youth Offending Team Structure

Appendix - 4 Risk Register
Risks to the delivery of this plan and to the performance of the YOT against statutory indicators is given below and scored against the following scale
12345678910
InitialResidualDescription of risk A (1-5)
LikelihoodB (1-5)
ImpactC (A+B)
ScoreMitigation of riskD (1-5)
LikelihoodE (1-5)
ImpactF (D+E)
Score


KPI one - First Time Entrants.
FTE figure rises and more young people enter the formal criminal justice system.347FTE figures have risen recently but two powerful actions are in place to mitigate this, first the introduction of multi-agency OOCD panels plus a pilot of a scheme whereby police have to consult a youth specialist before making a young person a FTE. These plus local police monitoring FTE data will serve to reduce FTE numbers.224KPI two - reoffending.
Reoffending figures rise and lead to loss of confidence in the effectiveness of YOT interventions plus in increase in custodial sentences.
347More up to date data will be gathered through LiveTracker and local police data to ensure that re-offending is closely monitored and action is taken to reduce this. Young people with the highest risk of reoffending are given the most impactful sentences.
235KPI three - use of custody.
Number of custodial sentences and remands rise due to lack of confidence in non- custodial sentences.145Robust alternatives to custody are presented to the Courts. Close working relationships with Plymouth Social Care Services ensure that suitable accommodation is available, therefore reducing the pressure for custodial sentences. Similarly remands are kept to a minimum.123Quality audits do not take place regularly and therefore quality assurance and inspection preparation is hampered.246A monthly programme of multi agency audit takes place across CYPF services which includes YOT. YOT management undertake weekly QA in respect of performance and this has evidenced a rise in the quality of work/learning in several areas and regular audits based on the HMIP inspection framework are currently taking place. 235Lack of meaningful feedback gathered from service users, (young people and parents).
347A very user-friendly process has been purchased (Viewpoint) for gathering young person's feedback and has been QA by SALT.
This is presented to children and young people at mid and end of order (statutory) /intervention  (prevention).336Service unable to provide full staffing levels due to adverse weather conditions, illness epidemic or other major incident134Adverse weather arrangements have been tested (infrequently) in recent years and have proved resilient - arrangements involve urgent cases being covered as a priority, less urgent matters being cancelled.123











 














25










PLYMOUTH CITY COUNCIL





