														 

PORTSMOUTH YOT (PYOT)
YOUTH JUSTICE STRATEGIC PLAN 2019-20



(As required under S40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998)






CONTENTS



1. Introduction .................................................................................................3
2. Summary of Achievements and Best Practice .....................................................3
3. Structure and Governance ..............................................................................5
4. Resources and Value for Money ......................................................................,6
5. Partnership Arrangements ..............................................................................8
6. Overview of Performance against KPI's .............................................................9
7. Self Assessment- Strengths and Stretch ...........................................................12
8. Risks to Future Delivery (and mitigation) ...........................................................13
9. Overall Summary .........................................................................................14
10. Progress against PYOT Priorities 2018/19.......................................................15
11. PYOT Priorities 2019/20 ..............................................................................18
12. PYOT Plan on a Page .................................................................................21.


Appendices:
- A: PYOT Team Structure .........................................................................22

1. Introduction

Under S40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, it is the duty of each local authority, after consultation with partner agencies, to formulate and implement an annual youth justice plan setting out:
* How youth justice services in their area are to be provided and funded
* How the youth offending team (YOT) or equivalent service will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out. 
Review of progress against priorities for 2018/19 can be found in pages 15 to 17. This year, a further year-long plan will be submitted in anticipation of new guidance being issued by the Youth Justice Board on the requirement for plans from 2020/21. The priorities set for 2019/20 are outlined in more detail on pages 18 to 20 and are:
* Portsmouth Youth Justice services are offered innovatively, within resource available, across the partnership
* Delivery of Quality Assurance and Management Oversight Frameworks supports 'good' service delivery, and informs ongoing improvement in delivery of practice.
* Reducing First Time Entrants, Reoffending and Use of Custody 
* Embedding National Standards 2019

2. Summary of Achievements and Good Practice 2018/19

Early in 2018/19, PYOT Partnership Management Board established a Service Development Plan following benchmarking against new HMIP inspection standards. This Plan has been successfully implemented, and ongoing elements will be carried over into both strategic and operational delivery plans for 2019/20. In particular, performance reporting for PYOT has been revised and enhanced, monitoring mechanisms for assessment timeliness have been implemented, key policies have been updated to ensure currency, and a new range of intervention programmes have been developed for frontline delivery. An inter-YOT Review with Southampton YOS in October 2018 has provided a baseline for assessment of practice, and plans are in place to repeat it this year to test impact of improvement work. An Internal PCC Audit was also carried out in March/April 2019 and has confirmed the YOT has a good sense of place. 

Factors impacting on all 3 national key performance indicators have been subject to additional scrutiny, afforded by increased Service Leader capacity, over the year. Analysis has been undertaken in respect of FTE, Custody, Reoffending, LAC and Offending, and Education over 2018/19, and will inform planning and delivery in 2019/20. Performance regarding disproportionality has been relatively good, and therefore not analysed, but is monitored via quarterly data. 

Good progress has been made on understanding the LAC/YOT cohort, and measures are in place to build on this. The existing 'LAC and Offending' quarterly meetings have continued to take place, working to an Action Plan agreed jointly by YOT, Childrens Social Care and the Police in September 2018. A process for 6-monthly snapshot analyses has been established to monitor cohort  characteristics, and bi-monthly joint case audits are now taking place with Managers and Practitioners from both service areas (and input from Police) for QA and improvement purposes. The YOT's Priority Young People (PYP) scheme has also been revised to build better links with IRO/CP Chairs.

Systems for youth to adult (Y2A) transitions have also been reviewed, following learning from a significant incident in March 2018 and alongside revisions to the pan-Hampshire Y2A Protocol several months later. As part of this, an existing Y2A Programme has been updated and implemented in Portsmouth, to support young people reaching Y2A transition as well as transfer. Regular 'Y2A' meetings are held (every 6 weeks) with colleagues from the National Probation Service (NPS), Community Rehabilitation Company (CRC) and the local authority Through Care Team (TCT) to ensure relevant cases are discussed and factors relating to transitions in care are also taken into account. 

Drawing from examples of effective practice elsewhere and an understanding of its cohort, the YOT has also developed a range of new intervention packages which staff can deliver to children under our supervision including: 
* Safety Mapping (based on work done by the Contextual Safeguarding Network)
* Knife Crime Awareness (including safety planning and conflict management)
* Peer Pressure (including content exploring exploitation) 
* Engage (for post- Breach work to increase compliance). 
* Girls Programme (tackling factors underlying offending behaviour)
Currently under development are programmes in relation to drugs supply and exploitation, substance misuse and motivation to change. Other programmes will be developed during 2019/20 based on emerging caseload profiling. 

Additionally, work delivered by the local Junior Attendance Centre has been developed over 2018/19; seeking to increase the number of children attending, enhancing awareness of its delivery through an Open Day held in January 2019,  and updating the range of sessions available in light of changes to the YOTs caseload since the JAC's inception. This will continue into 2019/20 through a process of updating session content, and building greater links between JAC and YOT staff as well as building on partnerships with other organisations such as the OPCC Youth Commission and Street Doctors. 

A successful Open Day was also delivered by Restorative Justice Practitioners and the YOT Referral Order and Volunteer Co-Ordinator as part of Restorative Justice Awareness Week in November 2018. They have sought to enhance and expand the range of reparation options and Panel venues available across the City. This included building on existing joint-working with Portsmouth City Council's youth and community services to make use of their shared facilities, and developing links within the retail sector. 

The PYOT Service Leader has worked with others to enhance the range of development opportunities for partnership staff.  In 2018, WRAP training was delivered to YOT staff by the local Prevent leads. In 2019, a joint workshop to identify resources to tackle exploitation was held with YOT and local Barnardos staff. Two Youth to Adult (Y2A) workshops were delivered in January 2019 to launch an updated pan-Hampshire Y2A Protocol, attended by staff from YOT, Community Rehabilitation Company (CRC), National Probation Service (NPS) and the local Through Care Team. Additionally, the YOT Service Leader worked with the local MAPPA Co-Ordinator and a Hampshire YOT Team Manager to revise the existing YOT/MAPPA Memorandum of Understanding and deliver MAPPA training to all YOT Team and Case Managers across pan-Hampshire. Most recently, an 'Introduction to Youth Justice' workshop was delivered to multi-agency practitioners on behalf of Portsmouth Safeguarding Children's Board (PSCB), to increase awareness of the YOTs work. It has now been agreed that this will be added to annual training calendars for both PSCB and PCC. 

PYOT also relaunched their Service User Feedback Strategy alongside PCC's Children and Families annual 'Feedback February' event in 2019. The YOT secured a high level of feedback from children under supervision, and are awaiting collated returns to inform next steps. Fundamentally, our new strategy will seek feedback from children around 3 key questions, in a variety of formats and forums, and be developed over 2019/20 to include victim satisfaction, parent/carer feedback and sentencer evaluation.  

3. Structure and Governance 
As outlined in last year's plan, the PYOT partnership provides youth justice services for the Portsmouth City Council (PCC) area comprising the local Youth Offending Team (YOT), Junior Attendance Centre (JAC) and Appropriate Adult (AA) services contracted out to The Appropriate Adult Service (TAAS). Broader preventative functions in the PCC area are served via Early Help and Prevention service, and supported by a range of programmes offered via third sector organisations. 
Nationally, the YOT is supported and overseen by the Youth Justice Board for England and Wales, a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Ministry of Justice. Locally, the YOT continues to be positioned with the Harm and Exploitation branch of Children and Families Services. It is overseen by the PYOT Partnership Management Board which is chaired by the Local Super Intendant and meets on a quarterly basis, consisting of representatives from the 4 statutory agencies, Children's Services (including Education), Hampshire Constabulary, National Probation Service and Health.  A representative of Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunal Services and the lead Member for Children's Services are additional core members. The local Board holds the YOT to account by monitoring performance against both national and local indicators, reported on a quarterly basis via the YOT Service Leader, and ensuring that it maintains compliance with the terms and conditions of YJB Grant.
A Strategic Partnership Map for Portsmouth City is currently under review and not available at the time of submission. However, the Head of Harm and Exploitation attends the Safer Portsmouth Partnership (SPP), and is embedded within the wider Children and Families Senior Management Team, reporting to the Deputy Director for Children's Services. The Service Leader has maintained links within the pan-Hampshire area, and developed good working relationships more locally in Portsmouth since coming into post in March 2018. YOT Team Leaders are well-established, and have links to key operational functions delivered across the City, including Resource Panel, Supported Housing Panel, the Joint Decision Making Panel and local Courts. 
Relative stability in staffing has been achieved after a number of staff changes in 2017/18 and the current team structure is outlined in Appendix A. Of note, in September 2018, the team welcomed a new Speech and Language Therapist (SALT) post for 5.5 hours per week. A successful bid for health funding will now extend this provision into 2019/20 and increase it to 0.4 post. In respect of volunteers, the Referral and Volunteer Co-Ordinator has worked to increase the number available to support the YOT in its work and at the time of writing 11 were fully trained and available, with a further 3 awaiting training required to commence their role. 

4. Resources and Value for Money

The PYOT Team Structure is provided in Appendix A. The forecast 2019/20 budget is outlined below, alongside all partner contributions reflected as % of the overall YOT budget.














Through partner contributions, PYOT meets minimum staffing requirements and statutory functions. A budget review during 2018/19 identified that funding levels enable the service to be delivered as required, but no more than that, and that there were no additional funding streams available for recurring budget. The Children and Families Services contribution was rebased to better reflect actual sums provided and is the biggest contribution. Additional funding has been sourced for the SALT post (for 2019/20), but all other contributions either remain as they were for the previous year or reflect small reduction. In terms of wider contribution:

* HMCTs do not provide cash or in-kind contributions. However, they are represented at the YOT Board to contribute to overall decision making given their clear links to youth justice. 
* In-kind contributions are received from Police, Probation and Health in term of staffing (with Probation also providing a small cash sum). Wider management provision, and premises/support services, are provided to the YOT on a nominal basis. 
* Grant funding from the OPCC (confirmed until March 2020) directly funds PYOT's Referral Order and Volunteer Co-Ordinator post and contributes to the increased Service Leader post to support analysis and strategic planning. 
* Cash contribution from Public Health supports delivery of Substance Misuse services which can be accessed by the YOT, from CCG for the YOT CAMHS Nurse and funding via Health and Justice streams directly funds SALT provision. 
* The YJB Effective Practice Grant is used to support the ongoing development of the service, across a range of staff roles and projects within the team. This has been reduced slightly for 2019/20 and therefore does not reflect any increases in costs incurred on a year on year basis (e.g. salary increments)
* Reserves from the Remand Grant supported the YOT's ability to meet increasing costs in that area of work in 2018/19 as demand outstretched existing resource. That reserve has now been spent, and with a Remand Grant which provides less than 10% of last year's costs this is an area of significant stretch. 
* The YJB Junior Attendance Centre (JAC) Grant is used to secure suitable venue and staffing levels to enable JAC delivery. In 2018/19, this included enhanced levels of oversight to review current delivery and this will continue into 2019/20.
Overall, the YOT budgets (in totality) will afford delivery of the service for this year. However, if any further reductions were to be announced, there would likely be no option but to review staffing levels and/or service delivery as this now constitutes the majority of the YOT budget. Given pressures already identified, and the range of improvement work being delivered, the knock on impact of that would be for the YOT to have no options but to reduce the quality and/or capacity of the service it provides. 
5. Partnership arrangements
Strategic partnerships are outlined in Section 3. Financial contributions are outlined in Section 4. 

PCC's ambition to be a 'Restorative City' has continued, and restorative practice is delivered across the work of Children and Families Services. Roles and responsibilities within the Harm and Exploitation branch of Children and Family Services are now established with exploration of overlap and opportunities for joint working undertaken. This will be explored further in 2019.

PYOT continues to be based at the Civic Offices, working at venues across the City (e.g. for reparation and Referral Order panels). The team is co-located with Portsmouth MASH and South Locality Children's Social Care Team, close to the Through Care Team and Senior Managers for the wider service. Harm and Exploitation services are located on another floor within the same building and relevant managers meet on a monthly basis to facilitate growing links. Police, Health, Education and Housing representatives are also based within the Civic building and Courts services are within walking distance of the office. The local Police custody suite will move from its central location during 2019/20. 
The YOT Management Team still comprises professionals from Probation, Social Work and Education backgrounds, providing a good mix of knowledge and expertise and secondments from other agencies remain in place for relevant staff. Changes have been made to local delivery of substance misuse services to extend availability, and the YOT now has its own 'Substance Misuse Champion' to support practice within the team. 
Appropriate Adult services are still delivered via The Appropriate Adult Service (TAAS) under contract held between them, Hampshire Constabulary and the 4 pan-Hampshire YOTs (4YOT-Portsmouth, Southampton, Hampshire and Isle of Wight). The Portsmouth Junior Attendance Centre (JAC) is open to 4YOT referrals given local geographical boundaries. Arrangements for Saturday/Bank Holiday Court Officer cover are also shared with Hampshire YOT for the same reason, with a dedicated PYOT manager available each time. 
Between the 4 YOTs, representation to some pan-Hampshire forums is shared; the PYOT Service Leader attends the MAPPA Delivery Sub-Group and OPCC Hate Crime Working Group on behalf of 4YOT managers. For PYOT, the Service Leader attends pan-Hampshire meetings: Liaison and Diversion Service (HLDS), Concordat on Children in Custody, TAAS Contract Review meetings as well as Y2A Meetings and the Operational MET group. For restorative justice (RJ), a pan-Hampshire practitioner network has been developed and is attended by PYOT RJ staff. 
More locally, the YOT is linked to Children's Services Senior Management Team (SMT) via the Head of Harm and Exploitation,. The YOT Service Leader attends regular 'All Managers' Meetings, and reports to SMT on a 6 monthly basis. An annual report is also submitted to the Portsmouth Safeguarding Children's Board. YOT Team Leaders are linked to local forums, and attend Court User Groups for the area on a minimum annual basis.
6. Overview of end of year 2018/19 PYOT performance against KPIs:
First Time Entrants






















Reducing Reoffending























Reducing Use of Custody:


















Self Assessment- Strengths and Stretch:




7. Areas of strength and stretch


Areas of strength: 

The YOT Partnership has increased its understanding of the cohort via enhancement of its data collection and performance reporting. Links between strategic governance and oversight (e.g. The YOT Management Board) and operational delivery (frontline staff) functions have been strengthened through development of Board to Service updates and a new performance dashboard. Frontline staff engage positively with children and young people, and are committed to continuous service improvement. They have been supported to understand their own roles and responsibilities, and how these contribute to wider partnership aims (including the YOT's performance monitoring framework), within a developing culture of accountability across the Team. Creativity in intervention delivery is evident, particularly with regards to Restorative Justice, and can be enhanced further by ongoing delivery of structured intervention packages now in place. Team members are supported via regular supervision with YOT Managers who are equally keen to develop good practice models across the service. Performance improvement work undertaken in response to previous inspections is supported by additional resource within the leadership and business support areas of the team which has increased capacity for development. Relative stability in staffing levels, combined with a reduction in overall caseloads, now allows a period of reflection and consolidation. 


Areas of stretch: 
Self-assessment completed in 2018 identified a need to revise and review systems within the team. This has been achieved, but now needs to be embedded, expanded and measured through effective implementation of operational management oversight and quality assurance processes over 2019/20. In particular, the timeliness and quality of assessment, planning, intervention and review will be a focus, not least due to its anticipated impact on reoffending rates. Use of Service User Feedback will also be important, to inform the YOTs delivery at the frontline. Use of performance data will also be further refined to support accuracy and effectiveness of local analysis, which in turn will inform intervention review and delivery over time as well as strategic planning. Impact on delivery will be assessed by the local YOT Partnership Board. Additionally, implementation of new National Standards will be a key focus in 2019/20, measured via delivery of the required Self-Assessment activity from September 2019 onwards. 


8. Risk to Future Delivery against the youth justice outcome measures: 

Risks to PYOT's future delivery against youth justice outcome measures are inherent within reducing and/or short-term contributions from some of its partners, which inhibit effective, long term planning. Budgetary pressures are experienced across the partnership, though commitment remains to ensure youth justice services are adequately supported and appropriately resourced. In relation to PYOT's delivery against youth justice outcome measures, key identified risks (and actions intended to mitigate) are as follows:



First Time EntrantsKey Risks Mitigation/Intended ActionsChanges outside the service (e.g. Police practice or reduction of prevention services) impacting on FTE rates.

Seriousness of offending and/or offence denial reducing opportunity for lower level disposals.
Continued exploration with pan-Hampshire YOT leaders and Constabulary colleagues.

Strengthen work by wider partners (e.g. Early Help and Prevention) to identify and reduce criminogenic need at the earliest opportunity and solicitors re: no comment interviews.



Reoffending

Key Risks Mitigation/Intended ActionsReducing partnership resource resulting in unmet need and/or ability to respond.


Timeliness and quality of delivery (including engagement strategies) inhibiting delivery of effective interventions.Continued partnership working and sourcing of alternative delivery (e.g. voluntary sector), particularly in relation to risk of exploitation. 

Focus on delivery of management oversight and quality assurance frameworks within YOT, as well offence to outcome timeliness in conjunction with partners.


Use of CustodyKey Risks Mitigation/Intended ActionsIncrease in custodial sentencing due to repeat offending, and/or serious youth violence.


Resettlement strategies impacted by external factors 
Continued partnership working and development of strategies (e.g. PYP)  and interventions (e.g. Knife Crime Awareness)

Awareness and development of constructive resettlement across the partnership. 
9. Overall Summary: 
Portsmouth YOT remains positioned within the Children and Families directorate of Portsmouth City Council, and has begun to embed itself within the Harm and Exploitation branch in light of the overlap between offending and exploitation. Following a self-assessment in early 2018/19, the YOT has successfully delivered a Service Development Plan to enhance and improve its delivery over the past 12 months. Ongoing (and new) actions will be incorporated within Strategic and Operational Plans for 2019/20, enabling them to be incorporated within 'business as usual' and consolidate steps taken to date. Performance reporting has also been revised, and analysis on key areas undertaken, to ensure the local Partnership YOT Board is informed by proper evaluation of local issues, and subsequent recommendations. 
This Strategic Youth Justice Plan will provide an over-arching framework under which that plan can be delivered, and clearly outlines headline activities to be completed over 2019/20.  It will be supported by an Operational Team Plan, to cover the same period.  Progress against outcome measures will be subject to internal review in December 2019, with full year updates provided via PYOT's Strategic Youth Justice Plan to be submitted for 2020/21.











10. Review of progress against PYOT Priorities 2018/19 - Strategic Youth Justice Plan 
OutcomeService ActivityTarget/Success MeasureCommentary on progress1. Portsmouth Youth Justice services are offered innovatively, within resource available, across the partnership



Overall: Developing links with partners to support wider  strategic  priorities e.g CSE, LAC, Missing. 
Ongoing review of YOT budget/contributions, alongside needs analysis.YOT services delivered effectively within budget in 2018/19.Links were developed via PSCB and PCC Harm and Exploitation Services. 
PYOT services were delivered within available resource in 2018/19. A review of resource/contribution was completed in October 2018, and updated in January 2019 to inform budget planning for 2019/20.a) YOT embedded within 'Harm and Exploitation' branch of C&F ServicesYOT evidences 'hidden harm' approach within day to day work.Links embedded at Service Leader level. Operationally, assessment of risk of CSE expanded to include CCE by local variation and new toolkit in use. Joint working in delivery of awareness raising and preventative approaches (e.g. with Edge of Care service). b) Range of YOT Interventions reviewed (including RJ and JAC) - including those re: use of social media- and use of local toolkits YOT intervention programmes reflect risk/need and offending profile of YOT cohort
Analysis completed for FTE/Reoffending/Custody/Education and LAC. Caseload Profile developed as part of Quarterly Performance Report. Risk of Anti Social Behaviour and Offending (RASBO) screening tool developed. JAC sessions updated and content reviewed. Range of intervention programmes developed. SALT provision secured to support this. Resources for safe use of internet and social media identified.c) Clear links and pathways in place to other local services (e.g. Early Help, CSE, Troubled Families)Casework evidences use of pathways to develop and support sustainable changePathways mapped and confirmed via central "Referrals and Toolkits" online folder; incorporated into revised Risk Assessment and Management police. Quality Assurance mechanisms developed to measure this, and will be implemented across 2019/20. 
2. Culture of performance and accountability is embedded within PYOT
Overall: PYOT Performance and QA Framework to identify key areas and trends to inform service delivery and continuous development; ensuring roles and responsibilities within this are understood and consistently applied.Adherence to YOT Service Development Plan
Strengthened performance framework in place to inform decision making by YOT Board.Performance Framework enhanced and expanded via Quarterly Report to Board. Service Development Plan implemented and measured, alongside Strategic and Operational Plans. Progress mapped at quarterly Board meetings, and in-house workshops with staff.
Timeliness tracker trialled and revised for use within team. Inter-YOT Review completed with Southampton YOS in October 2018 and Internal Audit in March/April 2019. Team Away Day held 10.04.19 to build on work done to date and set out clear accountabilities going forward. New quality assurance mechanisms developed and launched at Away Day. a) Engagement and evaluation mechanisms in place to inform service deliveryMechanisms in place and pro-actively evaluated (including annual report to YOT Board)Engage (Post-Breach) Programme developed. Engagement mechanisms reviewed via SALT practitioner September 2018- March 2019. New Engagement, Enabling Compliance and Enforcement Policy issued April 2019.
Service User Feedback Strategy launched February 2019; to be expanded in 2019/20.
b) Strengthened Quality Assurance processes in place.QA Framework in place, informing service delivery and demonstrating good practice is in placeExisting QA measures were reviewed 2018/19. New QA tools were trialled during Inter-YOT Review in October 2018 and have been enhanced, alongside a range of practitioner checklists which will support development of required practice. Joint audits with Children's Social Care occur every other month to explore LAC and Offending joint working. New Management Oversight Strategy (completed March 2019) will be delivered and embedded over 2019/20.
 

OutcomeService ActivityTarget/Success MeasureCommentary on progress3. First Time Entrants rate reduced
PYOT FTE cohort is analysed and understood, and relevant factors addressed through work across the partnership.Reduction in FTE
 (G= <313, A= 314-400, R=>401)FTE analysis was completed and submitted to local Board in September 2018, along with recommendations to inform strategic approach. 
Year end rate = 420)4. Reoffending rate reduced
Reoffending cohort is analysed and understood, and relevant factors addressed through work across the partnershipReduction in reoffending rate 
(G= <36%, A= 36.1-39%, R= >39%)Reoffending analysis was completed and submitted to local Board in January 2019, along with initial recommendations to inform strategic approach. 
PYP Scheme has been remodelled and will undergo continual review in 2019/20. Intervention packages have been reviewed and enhanced.
Year end binary rate= 55.1%5. Use of Custody reduced
Custody cohort is analysed and understood, and relevant factors addressed through work across the partnership.
Reduction in use of custody rate
(G=<0.38, A=0.39-0.45, R= >0.45)Custody analysis completed and submitted to local Board in July 2018, along with initial recommendations to inform strategic approach. 
PYP Scheme has been remodelled and will undergo continual review in 2019/20. Intervention packages have been reviewed and enhanced.
Resettlement approaches have been reviewed in light of constructive resettlement, and new approaches being developed to support this. 
Year end rate= 0.50%

11. PYOT Priorities 2019/20 - Strategic Youth Justice Plan 


OutcomeTeam lead officerService ActivityTarget/Success MeasureActions1. Portsmouth Youth Justice services are offered innovatively, within resource available, across the partnership
NB- This is the same as Outcome 1 2018/19, but has been updated to reflect new service activities for 2019/20. 



Chair of YOT Partnership Board and YOT Leadership TeamOverall: Ongoing review of YOT budget and contributions, alongside needs analysis. Development of partnership working to support the YOT's wider strategic priorities, including joint bids where appropriate.  YOT services are delivered effectively within budget in 2019/20.Deliver services within allocated budget 2019/20. Ongoing review of effectiveness and impact of service delivery. Opportunities for additional funding to be explored.a) Develop YOT delivery with 'Harm and Exploitation' servicesJoint approaches and models of delivery are in place.Identify scope for joint delivery (e.g. range of workshops and/or preventative approaches).b) Enhance range of YOT Interventions through expansion of YOT programmes and partnership working.YOT intervention programmes continue to reflect risk/need and offending profile of YOT cohort.Develop range of 'in-house' programmes. Support other services to develop same (in respect of risk of offending). Increase specialist inputs via partnership working (e.g. keeping yourself safe projects).c) Ongoing review of service delivery against strategic aims.Service delivery is fit for purpose.Review roles and responsibilities within the team. Identify opportunities to develop. Revise as required.2. Delivery of Quality Assurance and Management Oversight Frameworks supports 'good' service delivery, and ongoing improvement in delivery of practice. 
NB- This has changed.  Outcome 2 for 2018/19 referred to developing a culture of performance and accountability. This will now progress to ensure quality delivery.
. 
YOT Service/Team LeadersOverall: Implementation of PYOT Management Oversight Strategy, including Quality Assurance measures. Outcomes and impact to be evidenced in day to day work and contribute to wider planning. QA outcomes inform the work of the Board.Embed new strategies and updated policies within team. Monitor new processes and outcomes/impact.  
a) Embed internal Management Oversight Strategy and new QA processes.Casework evidences effective management oversight.
Build on recent development to embed within practice. Ensure steps are delivered as required. Complete additional case/supervision audits to assess implementation and impact. b) Seek external assessment of above through i) internal audit and ii) inter-YOT review External audits support ongoing improvementInternal review April- June 2019, alongside HMIP-style audit.
Inter-YOT Review October 2019. c) Self-assess against new National Standards 2019 in relation to operational a (YOT) aspects.Self-Assessment is completed and demonstrates good level of compliance.
Self-Assessment to be undertaken September 2019-March 2020, and submitted to YJB April 2020. Policy/QA to be updated as required.

OutcomeTeam lead officerService ActivityTarget/Success MeasureActions3. First Time Entrants rate reduced
YOT Service LeaderPYOT FTE cohort is analysed, understood and reduced by addressal of relevant factors via partnership working.Reduction in FTE
 (G= <313, A= 314-400, R=>401)Work with Hampshire Police and pan-Hampshire YOT colleagues to explore and reduce trends across the county. Review FTE analysis to identify key trends. Map local services' ability to respond and support development of required responses to enhance local prevention offer.4. Reoffending rate reduced
YOT Service LeaderReoffending cohort is analysed and understood, and relevant factors addressed through work across the partnershipReduction in reoffending rate 
(G= <36%, A= 36.1-39%, R= >39%)Enhance analysis and review. Continue to develop caseload profile and corresponding interventions.  Monitor remodelling of PYP and identify other projects based on shared learning across the sector. 5. Use of Custody reduced
YOT Service LeaderCustody cohort is analysed and understood, and relevant factors addressed through work across the partnership.
Reduction in use of custody rate
(G=<0.38, A=0.39-0.45, R= >0.45)Review custody analysis and resulting recommendations. Revise resettlement pathways and sources of support. Closely monitor remand levels and develop remand reduction strategy if required. 6. National Standards 2019 embedded within work of YOT Partnership Board.Chair of YOT Partnership Board and YOT Leadership TeamNS Audit to completed Sept 19-March 2020 including gap analysis to inform future strategic planning. NS Audit completed an action plan agreed (if necessary)Self-Audit to be completed with all Board Members by December 2019. NS Champion roles to be identified amongst Board Members and continue into 2020.
12. PYOT Plan on a Page








Appendix A: Portsmouth YOT Structure as at 01.06.2019







