







 










Youth Justice Plan 2019-2020











Contents

										Page No.


Glossary										3											   		 

Section 1 Introduction								4											 	 	 

Section 2 - Structure and Governance					6			 	

Section 3 - Resources and Value for Money					8	         		 	

Section 4 - Partnership arrangements				         12					    	         		
			
Section 5 - Risks to Future Delivery					         14
			

Approval and sign off		        				                    15				























Glossary


ABC - Acceptable Behaviour Contract

APB - Area Planning Board (substance misuse)

ASB - Anti Social Behaviour

AWYOS - All Wales Youth Offending Strategy

CAMHS - Child and Adolescent mental health

CAIS  - Community Alcohol Intervention Service

CBO - Criminal Behaviour Order

CJSM - Criminal Justice Secure mail

CNS - Clinical Nurse Specialist

CR - Community Resolution

CSP - Community Safety Partnership

CYSUR -Children and Youth, Safeguarding and Unifying the Region

DTO - Detention and Training Order

Estyn - Her Majesty's Inspectorate for Education and Training in Wales

ETE - Education Training and Employment

FACTS - Forensic Adolescent Consultant Service

FJI - Full Joint Inspection

HIW - Health Inspectorate Wales

HMIP - Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation

HMPPS - Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service

IOM - Integrated Offender Management

IPPAS - Improvement Plan - Policy and Systems

ISS - Intensive Supervision and Surveillance

KPI - Key Performance Indicator

LASPO - Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act

LCJB - Local Criminal Justice Board

MACSE - Multi Agency Child Sexual Exploitation

MAPPA - Multi agency public protection arrangements

MARAC - Multi agency risk assessment conference

OCN - Open College Network

OOCD - Out of Court Disposals

OMT- Operational Management Team

OPCC  - Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner

PCEP - Professional Certificate in Effective Practice

PLOG - Powys Local Operational Group (safeguarding)

PPE - Promoting Positive Engagement

PROP - Powys Reducing Offending Project (IOM)

PSR - Pre Sentence Report

SMAPf - Substance Misuse Action Plan fund

START WELL - replaces Children and Young People's Partnership

RJ / A- Restorative Justice / Approaches

TAF - Team around the Family

WG - Welsh Government

WYJAP - Wales Youth Justice Advisory Panel

Y2A - Youth to adults transitions

YC - Youth Caution

YCC - Youth Conditional Caution

YCPF - Youth Crime Prevention Fund

YEPF - Youth Engagement and Progression Framework

YIS - Youth Intervention Service

YISP - Youth Inclusion and Support panel

YJB - Youth Justice Board

YJS - Youth Justice Service

YJMIS - Youth Justice Management Information Service

YMC - YOT Managers Cymru

YRO - Youth Rehabilitation Order
Powys YJS vision statement

"Gwasanaeth proffesiynol ar gyfer pobl ifanc, eu teuluoedd a dioddefwyr troseddau sy'n ymroddedig i leihau troseddau ymhlith bobl ifanc.  Mae hefyd yn effeithiol o ran diwallu anghenion pobl Powys."


A professional service for young people, their families and victims of crime that is dedicated to the reduction of youth crime and is effective in meeting the needs of the people of Powys


Powys YJS aims to continually improve and to incorporate not only effective practice but also emerging practice and innovation. The service seeks to self-evaluate and be critical through quality assurance techniques, to maintain the delivery of best outcomes and to sustain reductions in offending. We will seek to maintain reductions of first-time entrants and recidivism by children and young people in Powys.

Powys Youth Justice Service operates in the largest rural county in Wales and at a time of considerable financial challenge.
1. Introduction
The Youth Justice Plan is prepared annually to meet legislative, grant making and business planning requirements. It also has to meet the requirements of a variety of audiences:-
* The Youth Justice Board - as a legislative requirement (Crime and Disorder Act 1998) and condition of grant
* The YJS Management board 
* The County Council 
* YJS staff 
* Partner agencies
* Thematic Partnerships
* Police and Crime Commissioner
* Welsh Government

The 2019-20 plan for the YJS in Powys is submitted during a restructure of Children's Services department as a whole. Initially the YJS was to be considered in phase 2 but this is on hold at present. However, we will use this year to concentrate on our structure to ensure that the service is fit for purpose.

During this financial year, there have been some difficulties with management, with the Senior Manager responsible for Youth Justice, not being available. This has led to acting-up arrangements across the service to ensure continuity. Our Probation Officer completed her secondment with us in May 2018 and no replacement was provided for the rest of the year. Whilst we have had consistent discussions with the National Probation Service, we were unable to secure a worker or the money to employ someone else.








Summary of Achievements from Youth Justice Plan 2018-19

1. Retain a staff complement of practitioners and managers that are trained to supervise and support young people in order to prevent offending and respond to incidents of public protection and safeguarding. 

During this period there has been significant disruption in the management of the service with the previous Senior Manager's availability being compromised .There have been interim management arrangements since March 2018. As a service we have been operating with one Operational Manager and 1 interim Deputy YOT Manager and with senior practitioners acting up to take on supervision of support staff. Despite this disruption, the service has retained the majority of the staff group, with only one member of staff leaving in this period. Recruitment into this and into a maternity cover post were completed swiftly.

2. Develop and implement a Regional Screening tool. This will be used with Prevention and Bureau cases to consider Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) to ensure a proportionate assessment and to determine the most appropriate interventions. 

Working in conjunction with our YOT colleagues in Dyfed Powys, we have implemented the Ceredigion Screening tool: Cystem for our Prevention cases only. A proposed Aces screening tool was not adopted but work is ongoing in terms of identifying Aces within Asset Plus. In terms of a proportionate assessment, a piece of work has been undertaken to utilise the existing screening tool as a guide to the level of assessment required, 

3. To develop understanding and use of Restorative Approaches across Schools, Foster Care and Children's Residential settings to prevent offending and anti-social behaviour and formal criminalisation, whilst promoting the needs and rights of victims. 

Demand from schools for Restorative Approaches training and support has taken up all our capacity and we have therefore been unable to progress training with Foster Carers and Children's residential settings. 

4. To continue to promote and develop the Sexual Behaviour project, developing close working relationships with the Youth Intervention Service, to ensure that young people whose behaviour is deemed to be problematic and/or harmful receive support and intervention at the earliest possible opportunity to prevent offending. 

The Sexual Behaviour Project is now embedded within the service and we invite referrals from Health, Education, Police, Children's services. 

5. To facilitate learning and development around parents whose children are at risk of offending, or have offended through the delivery of Take 3 Parenting sessions. These sessions will either be undertaken through co-facilitation within group settings, or specifically tailored and delivered on a 1:1 basis. 

The majority of staff within the service have been trained to deliver this programme. A number of groups have been held throughout the year across Powys and YJS staff have assisted with the facilitation of these. 1-1 work has also been done - 

6. To develop and implement a Participation Strategy to ensure that young people within the Criminal Justice system have their voice heard and their rights under the UNCRC are recognised and upheld. 

Unfortunately, the strategy has not been completed. However, two members of staff have been identified to consider various aspects of our work to see how we can encourage young people's participation. Currently we are working on a Bureau feedback form. There is also a significant amount of participation involved in the self-assessment part of Asset Plus. We have redesigned our risk management meetings to include the voice of the child and their parents/carers.

7. To ensure all Youth Justice Policies are updated following the implementation of Asset Plus and Social Services and Well-being (Wales) Act 2014 and that they are published alongside all other Children's Services policy documents. 

Risk Management Policy, Volunteer Policy and, YJS and Children's Services Locality teams joint working arrangements have been updated this year. YJS Managers have been active members of the Local Authority Policies and Procedures group and have ensured that Youth Justice is included in other policies where required.
 

8. Monitor and analyse re-offending data to identify trends and future service requirements. 

We monitor and report this information to Management Board, but analysis has been sporadic. Our new case management system has the reoffending toolkit built in and this may help us to provide better analysis. We will need this to ensure we identify the correct cohort for Enhanced Case Management.

9. To ensure that all young people within the Youth Justice System, have their basic literacy and numeracy skills assessed and additional support provided where required to enhance their opportunities for positive outcomes 

Proposals were put to Management Board, but on this occasion, this was not felt to be appropriate. We will need to review.

10. To embed Quality Assurance across all levels of Youth Justice, using both quantative data linked to our Key Performance Indicators alongside qualitative information obtained via case specific audits, thematic audits, feedback from victims and feedback from Young People and their families.  To ensure that learning from this work is disseminated into daily practice. 

YJS Managers countersign all Asset Plus assessments and constructive comments are made. All reports to Bureau and for Referral Order Panel and Court are gate kept.  Arrangements were made for additional management QA'ing and whilst this has happened, on occasion this has not been consistent.

11. To actively monitor the implementation of Enhanced Case Management across YOT's in Wales and to share knowledge about the practice and outcomes for Young People with partner agencies and to explore opportunities to implement in Powys. 

All staff are now trained in ECM and we are waiting for confirmation from FACTS as to how many cases can be referred. As a service, we then need to make decisions about thresholds. Training was well received by all staff and they are keen to start using this approach.

12. To ensure that Desistance factors are considered, analysed and evidenced within all Assessments undertaken within the Youth Justice Service.  To raise awareness of desistance across partner agencies. 

Asset plus promotes this part of the assessment and managers' report that this is well evidenced in assessments. Through our new Risk Management process, we are raising awareness with other agencies involved. Within the process, we have a high focus on using a strengths based approach in line with Signs of Safety.

13. To undertake a review of a range of Case Management systems that could be used to support the delivery of the Service. 

During the past year, considerable work has been undertaken in this area and we eventually went out to tender. This process is just coming to an end and contracts are due to be awarded. The plan is for the new system to go live in September 2019.


2. Structure and Governance

Powys Youth Justice Service sits within Children's Services, within Powys County Council and is currently accountable to the Head of Children's Services who monitors the YJS operationally through 1:1 meetings with the Senior Manager for Intervention and Prevention (YOT Manager).

Powys Youth Justice Service is one of four Youth Offending Teams that cover the Dyfed-Powys area and it is important that they work strategically both individually and collaboratively to provide services to young people across Dyfed-Powys and provide effective local youth justice services. In respect of youth crime issues, and where appropriate and desirable, the four teams work together in the delivery of training and provision of appropriate services. 

Governance of the Youth Justice Service is provided by the YJS Management Board, which was chaired by the Director for Education and more recently (since March 2019) by the Corporate Director (Children and Adults). The YJS Management Board membership has mainly been consistent with only one or two agencies sending different representatives. New members are provided with an Induction pack and should have a formal induction with the YOT manager and Chair prior to their first Management Board meeting.  Some members of the management board have taken a pro-active role in considering policies and visiting teams.

The Management Board meets on a quarterly basis and is provided with performance information, details of inspections of other YOTs, relevant information about the Youth Justice System. Members are able to contact the YOT manager to make suggestions about items they would want to see on the agenda. The agenda is agreed between the chair of the Board and the YOT manager. The board is made aware of new policies/strategies and asked to contribute where required.


The Powys YJS Management Board should provide strategic direction with the aim of preventing offending by children and in accordance with section 40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, ensure that the work of the YOT is defined in a publicly accessible youth justice plan that is co-ordinated with other local plans. The Management board should be satisfied that the following systems and policies are in place specific to children in justice:

Systems

* Quality assurance systems built on feedback from key stakeholders including courts, victims, children, parents and carers
* Records and information held on children in custodial establishments is available and accessible to those who need to - to make sure there is the proper co-ordination of services to support children when they are in custody and when they are released
* Identify and generate management information - including passing this securely to the YJB or the Youth Custody Service and, 
* Management information is used for strategic planning and service development and is passed securely to partners where necessary and in compliance with the Data Protection Act 2018

Policies specific to Youth Justice

* Provision of persons to act as appropriate adults to safeguard the interests of children detained or questioned by police officers in line with the National Appropriate Adult Network's National Standards
* Provision for children who may be interviewed under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) while remanded or sentenced in youth detention accommodation whether within or outside the local authority area
* Service to victims in line with the Code of practice for victims for crime
* The quality of case management
* Public protection and desistance policies (including release and recall arrangements for children on licence/supervision)
* Engagement and compliance with court orders, remand and bail programmes, including responsibilities for undertaking enforcement action where case management sits outside the YJS.

The YJS Management Board, along with other strategic partnerships within the council, i.e. PLOG, CSP and IOM strive to ensure that strategic planning is in place for the effective delivery of youth justice services.
The management board meet quarterly and receive reports relating to KPI's, crime rates, young people who pose a risk to themselves or others, sentencing, prevention, health and other reports as required and these may be requested to consider specific factors in more depth. 








The table below shows the representation on the Management board.
Name OrganisationPositionEthnicityGenderAlison Bulman (Chair)Powys CCCorporate Director (Children and Adults)White BritishFemaleStephen PearceYJS
Senior ManagerWhite WelshMaleCllr Rachel PowellPowys CCCabinet Member - Children and Young People White FemaleJan ColePowys CCHead of Children ServicesWhite WelshFemaleAlec ClarkPowys CCHead of SchoolsWhite WelshMaleSonia MasonPowys tHB
Assistant Director of Nursing for SafeguardingWhiteFemaleVacantPowys tHBYJS Mental Health AdviserChristine HarleyHMPPSLDU Head for West WalesWhiteFemaleStuart BellDyfed Powys PoliceChief Inspector (partnerships)White WelshMaleJudith BakerHMCTSChair of Youth MagistratesWhiteFemaleEmma Lloyd-EdwardsCareers WalesOperational Development ManagerWhite Female
3. Resources and Value for Money 

The Powys Youth Justice Service budget comprises partnership funding, YJB funding and specific grant funding.


Youth Justice  BudgetSourceStaffingIn KindCash TotalCouncil SSD348,648125,57028,858503,076Education3,3013,301Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service11,3685,00016,368Health63,60863,608Police55,80055,800Police & Crime Commissioner40,122  40,122WG PPE 152,644  152,644YJB effective practice Grant162,456  162,456YJB Remand Allocation9,2169,216Total1,006,591

The funding provided to the YJS by all partners and grant-funding bodies is utilised for the delivery of services to reduce or prevent young people from coming into the criminal justice system. The main areas of work are outlined below - there will be a more detailed operational action plan that will be scrutinised by the YJS management board. 

1. Inspection - In response to new inspection criteria we recognise the need to ensure that our service is able to respond appropriately. As such we will undertake a benchmarking exercise against criteria - We will use this process to evaluate whether our current structure needs to change 
2. National Standards self -assessment/Audit- Along with the Management Board, we will undertake the self-assessment and Audit to ensure that the service is meeting statutory requirements.
3. Enhanced Case Management - Need to embed this into practice as per the Trauma Recovery Model discussed in the Wales Blueprint. We have not yet been provided with options for numbers from FACTS and this may lead to delays in implementation. Once we have the information from FACTS we will set thresholds and agree numbers. We currently have a cohort of staff who are trained and would anticipate a rolling programme to support this in the future. As a service we are committed to finding a way to work with the relevant young people. 
4. Case Management System - Tender process is completed and contract is due to be awarded. Go live date is September 2019 and there will be considerable work required to ensure that staff are able to utilise this system to ensure our data is accurate. 
5. Risk Management Meetings - We have revised our Risk Management procedures to incorporate a Signs of Safety approach with a view to being more inclusive of young people and parents/carers but also to improve oversight of risk. This will be reviewed at next management board.
6. Quality Assurance - We will refresh and review this process to develop a system that is achievable and based on good practice. 
7. Policies - 
National Standards would suggest that the following are the pertinent policies:

* Appropriate Adults (PACE)
* Victims
* Case Managements
* Public Protection
* Desistance
* Engagement and Compliance

Relevant policies will be drawn up or reviewed during this year

8. Review Sexual Behaviour Prevention project -We will promote Aim 2/3, and will review how we embed a functional assessment as part of this. We need to ensure regular update training for staff involved in this area to ensure they retain their specialist knowledge. 
9. Regular training for staff - We will ensure that all appropriate staff are offered the opportunity to undertake the Effective Practice Certificate. We will utilise the Youth Justice Workforce Development Plan to enable us to develop appropriate training and qualifications for Youth Justice Staff.


Staffing and Service Delivery

Powys Youth Justice Service works with young people across the whole Youth Justice spectrum (prevention, out of court and post court).

* Prevention of offending - Youth Inclusion and Support Panel
* Pre-convictions arena - PACE activities (Appropriate Adults), bail and remand management
* Out of Court - Bureau
* Community Sentences - Reparation Orders, Referral Orders and Youth Rehabilitation Orders
* Custodial sentences - DTO, S90/91

Powys YJS ensures the delivery of court orders (in both the community and custody) in line with National Standards for Youth Justice, National Case Management Guidance and other statutory requirements. We recruit, train, manage, supervise and deploy volunteers to carry out a range of functions including Bureau and Referral Orders. We operate a fully staffed court rota for Youth Courts. In addition, we provide Appropriate Adult cover for two local Police Stations during office hours, with this responsibility being passed to Children's Services Out of Hours services outside of office hours. Assessment and planning activities are undertaken in line with the Asset Plus framework. We ensure safeguarding, safety and wellbeing and management of risk, including public protection in relation to young people in the youth justice system. The YJS works with victims of youth crime to ensure meaningful input in work with young people who have offended and we have expanded Restorative Approaches across all orders and out into the community by the work done with schools. 

We believe that the current YJS structure generally enables the team to be able to deliver effective interventions and sustain positive outcomes for young people. This was evidenced in the last full, joint inspection where 'ensuring the sentence is served'  scored well, with the view that staff had the time to be able to build good relationships with young people, engaging well with them and ultimately ensuring that the intervention was effective. As mentioned above, new National Standards and new Inspection criteria offer us the opportunity to consider the current service needs.

Whilst Powys Youth Justice Service has appropriate staffing from Children's Services and Health, there has been a lack of provision from Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service and from the Local Authority Education department. These matters are raised regularly at Management Board. We had been hopeful of a start date for a Probation secondee but this is currently on hold. The Head of Schools has indicated that he will consider the education provision to the Youth Justice Service and confirm the contribution from education.























	
	
4. PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS

In order to benefit the YJS, Powys has links on a national, regional and local level. 

National

The Powys YJS Manager, along with Youth Offending Team managers in Wales, is part of YOT Managers Cymru (YMC). This forum addresses issues pertinent to Welsh YOTs; considers responses to YJB, WG and other bodies; and provides support for all Welsh YOT managers. 

The Wales Youth Justice Advisory Panel which oversees and guides the work of the YOTs, is a panel made up of representatives from WG, the YJB, the statutory partners and many other agencies that can influence the agenda in youth justice. YOT's are also represented on this and issues are fed into local networks. 

The chair of YMC or a representative sits on other National or UK groups, i.e. All Wales Criminal Justice Board. YOT's across Wales have been involved in assisting with the implementation of the National Protection Procedures with Welsh Government.

An Effective Practice panel - Hwb Doeth - is operating to look at:
* areas of practice that may need advice and assistance in research
* sharing good practice for development in other areas
Powys YJS Operational Manager attends Hwb Doeth as Regional representative
Powys YJS Operational Manager attends Hwb Doeth Regional Academic meetings

Regional

In the majority of instances, 'regional' refers to Dyfed Powys but there are exceptions to this, i.e. ERW the education region that Powys is part of, and areas where Powys sits on its own as a region i.e. Regional Partnerships Board - made up of Health and Children's Services.

YOTs across Dyfed Powys have a history of working collaboratively, i.e. commissioning training and undertaking bids for funding to both Welsh Government and Police and Crime Commissioners. Dyfed Powys YOT managers represent each other on strategic regional groups and the sub groups that sit below these.

Other regional arrangements include: 

Safeguarding children - CYSUR is the regional safeguarding board and the YOT manager representative on CYSUR is the Pembrokeshire YJS manager who represents all Dyfed Powys YOT's. A range of other YJS personnel sit on other sub groups of CYSUR. 


The Carmarthenshire YJS Manager is the representative on the Local Criminal Justice Board and is now the Chair of YMC Cymru

The Ceredigion YJS Manager chairs Hwb Doeth and is the Dyfed Powys Representative at MAPPA SMB.





Local

This is where the main area of partnership working takes place; this is not just by the YJS manager but other team members as well. 

Safeguarding
CYSUR Local exec - Assistant Director of Nursing for Safeguarding, Head of Children's Services and Chief Superintendent of Police
CYSUR - Powys Local operational group - YJS manager
Audit and policy subgroup - YJS Operational Manager
Training Sub group - YJS Operational Manager 
MACSE - YJS Manager

Community Safety Partnership
CSP Strategy meeting - also involves Local Serious Organised Crime Board and Local Contest Board - YJS manager
Problem solving groups - run by Dyfed Powys Police - YJS staff attend when required. YOT police officer also involved.

Substance Misuse
Area Planning Board - YJS Manager
Performance and Finance group of APB - YJS Manager
Harm reduction group - YJS Operational Manager


Other Partnership Groups - Partner Agency Meetings - Powys

MAPPA - YJS Operational Managers - as required -
Integrated Offender Management Steering Group - YJS Manager
PROP - Senior Practitioners as required
Children's Leadership Team - YJS Manager
Operational Management Team - YJS Manager and YJS Operational Managers 
Mental health officers group - YJS Operational manager 
Youth Court magistrates group - YJS Operational managers - 6 monthly in both Welshpool and Merthyr.
Court user group - Senior Practitioners 6 monthly in each area
Start Well Board - attended by Head of Children's Services
Workstream on Emotional Health and Wellbeing and Youth Support - YJS Manager


Restorative Approaches in schools

The YJS drives the development of restorative approaches in schools. It is envisaged that this will help reduce fixed and permanent exclusions, an area of risk for young people in terms of offending.  

Substance misuse - this is a commissioned service, provided by Kaleidoscope working in partnership with CAIS to provide services to adults and young people. The CAIS staff are co-located mainly within the YJS offices, which has proved extremely beneficial in ensuring that young people have easy access to services and with the added benefit of fulfilling the YJS KPI's.


ETE - the educational support to the YJS was reviewed a number of years ago following a long period of sharing posts with Childrens services. Unfortunately, since this time, the Youth Justice Service has had reduced support from Education although we do have access to Education systems to obtain information about young people.

Arrangements with Careers Wales had been robust but there have been significant changes in their service and we need to revisit our agreements with them to ensure that relevant information is shared in a timely manner

Accommodation -
The YJS KPI in relation to accommodation of young people is consistently good, any children and young people who are threatened or find themselves homeless, are referred to Childrens services. There is a shared homelessness assessment with housing, which means that young people do not have to complete two forms or be moved from one department to another. 

Mental Health - Powys Teaching Health Board continue to support the YJS by the provision of a Clinical Nurse Specialist although there has been a vacancy for a period in relation to the Mental Health Advisor for the YJS. They are able to ensure that staff receive training and consultation as well as young people having good access to services for both assessment and interventions

Resettlement - The use of custody in Powys has been non-existent for the past 2 years. However, there are arrangements in place for preparing alternatives and for services on release. The service is able to utilise the Powys Fostering placement finding service. If there is a requirement for out of county resources to fulfil this need then the Multi Agency Approval Panel will be called upon to consider the issues further.  National protocols are in place with Housing.

5. RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY AGAINST YOUTH JUSTICE OUTCOME MEASURES

RISKSACTIONS TO  MITIGATE RISKFuture budget efficiencies/reduction in partner contributions/staffing/Children and Communities GrantPotential restructureMaintaining/Improving performance and quality service in face of ongoing reductions in budgetsCase file audits
Review YJS Quality Assurance systems/processes
Ongoing self-assessments against HMIP Thematic inspections and National Standards
Robust scrutiny and support from Management BoardContinue to reduce re-offending in context of very challenging cohort as a result of impact of Prevention and Bureau systemsReducing Re-offending by Young People Strategy Children and Young People First
Undertake audit of current YJS Cohort to ensure resources are appropriate and meet the needs of children and young people
Further develop interventions and resources
Implement Enhanced Case Management approachCase Management System changesRecognition that new system will require staff time and that assessments may take longer in the initial phasePolicies and procedures require updatingYJS now part of Local Authority group looking at Policies and Procedures and policies and procedures are being updated.Management Oversight/GovernanceMembers of the Board are aware of their responsibilities to the YJS. Self-assessment against National Standards and Inspection Criteria should reinforce this.



Sign Off:




Stephen Pearce
Senior Manager Prevention and Intervention




Alison Bulman
Corporate Director (Children and Adults) - Chair of YJS Management Board 








2




1


