






Welcome to the Rotherham Youth Justice Plan 2019/21. Our two year Youth Justice Plan sits alongside the key local partnership strategies including; The Rotherham Children and Young People's Plan 2016/19, the Safer Rotherham Partnership Plan 2018/21, Youth Justice Board Business Plan 2019/20 and the South Yorkshire Police and Crime Plan 2017/21.  
Our Youth Justice Plan provides the detail as to how Rotherham Youth Offending Team (YOT) intends to deliver services to improve outcomes for young people, families and communities over the next two years against the Police and Crime Commissioner's three priorities;
* Protecting Vulnerable People 
* Tackling Crime and Anti-Social Behaviour
* Treating People Fairly
The strategic aims of Rotherham Youth Offending Team Board remain focused on preventing offending and reducing re-offending by young people. We aim to achieve this through strengthening the delivery of integrated services across the Early Help partnership that ensures young people are safeguarded, the public and victims of crime are protected and those who enter the criminal justice system are supported with robust risk management arrangements. We are committed to ensuring young people will be supported to reintegrate into their local communities and to reduce their offending in keeping with our ambition for Rotherham to be a Child Friendly Borough.  
The Rotherham  Youth Offending Team and Board works with our partners to ensure that we continue to provide a first class service to young people and communities and maintain the levels of supervision, risk management and safeguarding which will protect the public and support young people to stop offending.  
The YOT continues to support the Safer Rotherham Partnership (SRP) Priorities, with more recent work focussing on a systematic intervention to tackle Child Criminal Exploitation and Serious and Organised Crime Gangs operating across County Lines.
The SRP Priorities are;
* Protecting Vulnerable Children
* Protecting Vulnerable Adults
* Building Confident and Cohesive Communities
* Domestic Abuse and other related offences 
* Serious and Organised Crime
The changing Youth Justice landscape nationally, provides us with opportunities to build strong collaborative working relationships locally and regionally with our partners. Over the past 12 months we have implemented a new management structure within the YOT located within the Early Help Evidence Based Hub and at the heart of our Early Help Offer. We have worked hard to strengthen our links with partners through the YOT Board and through our YJB Head of Innovation and Engagement  in the North East, Yorkshire & Humber Region we organised the first South Yorkshire Youth Justice Partnerships development Day. 
Operationally we have forged stronger working practices with our Families for Change (Troubled Families) programme and our Early Help and Social Care locality teams. The Taylor Review of Youth Justice, published in 2016 and the government's response to it provides us with ability to explore how we can work more effectively to develop flexibility of intervention and improve our youth justice offer. I have retained my commitment to enable the Rotherham YOT Board to be a truly Young Person Centred by continuing to visit the secure estate and meeting with Rotherham young people placed around the country to learn about their experiences and bring this rich learning back to the YOT Board to improve our support and interventions. Through our Early Help Youth Voice workers we ensure that young people's voices and feedback comes to each YOT Board with workers enabling young people to attend to share their experiences directly as well as shaping our practice through case studies and young person led inspections and consultations through our Young Inspectors. 
I look forward to another effective period of partnership expansion and improved outcomes for our young people and families and I am very pleased to introduce the Rotherham Justice Strategic Plan for 2019-2021.
											

David McWilliams
Chair, Rotherham Youth Offending Team Board
Assistant Director Early Help, Rotherham Children's Services													








	















1FOREWORD BY CHAIR OF YOT MANAGEMENT BOARD2-32CONTENTS43OVERVIEW54STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE65OUR PLANS76PERFORMANCE: NATIONALLY MONITORED PRIORITIES6a* Preventing young people entering the youth justice system; Reducing First Time Entrants (FTE)8-96b* Reducing Re-offending106c* Reducing Use of Custody117LOCAL DEMOGRAPHICS7a* Population, Deprivation and Gender127b* Statements and Plans138REVIEW OF 2018 PERFORMANCE AGAINST PRIORITIES149RESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY1510PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS1610a* Voice and Influence1710b* Voice of the Child They Said - We Did1811RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY1912RESTORATIVE APPROACH TO VICTIMS OF YOUTH CRIME2013PRIORITIES FOR 2019/2021-2314APPROVAL AND SIGN OFF2415APPENDIX ONE:  Structure Chart2516APPENDIX TWO:  Governance Chart2617GLOSSARY27-28






The principal aim of the Youth Justice System as set out within the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 is to prevent offending by children and young people. 
The Act established the requirement for each local authority to provide a Youth Offending Team (YOT) to deliver this aim and have a Youth Justice Plan in place. 

In Rotherham our YOT works alongside statutory partners including Police, South Yorkshire Probation Trust and the NHS, together with a wide range of contracted Voluntary and Community Sector organisations to achieve the national youth justice strategic objectives which are to: 

* Prevent Offending 
* Reduce Re-Offending 
* Increase Victim and Public Confidence 
* Ensure the Safe and Effective use of Custody 

There is a statutory duty for an annual plan setting out the delivery and priorities of the youth justice service.  This plan is utilised to set the agenda for the YOT Management Board, and is monitored on a quarterly basis.  

The Rotherham YOT is a multi-agency service comprising four statutory agencies; Police, Local Authority, Health and the National Probation Service.  Each of these agencies has the statutory responsibility for resourcing and supporting the YOT Management Board.  There are strong links with the voluntary and community sector which have significant roles in the delivery of the Youth Offending Team priorities together with the strategic and operational expertise within the Children and Young People's Service and most importantly enabling the voice of the child to shape and influence the support and services received.

The Chair of the Rotherham YOT Management Board is also the Assistant Director of Early Help Services within Rotherham Children and Young People's Services and has a pivotal role within the Safer Rotherham Partnership (SRP). The Chair ensures that the vital links are maintained to community safety, early intervention and prevention, safeguarding and keeping children safe from harm via representation at key strategic boards.  

The implementation of Phase Two and Three of the Rotherham Early Help Strategy 2016-2019 concluded in March 2019, providing revised management structures for the YOT within Early Help. 

The Eric Manns Building houses the Rotherham Youth Offending Team who works with Early Help locality teams and partners across the borough with young people that are involved in Youth Crime and Anti-Social Behaviour as part of a multi-agency partnership with the aim of preventing offending and re-offending.  The locality teams offer advice and support around employment, careers advice, apprenticeships, training, sexual health and contraception and confidential advice and support for young people and families.















The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 set out the statutory requirements for the provision of Youth Offending Teams and a Governing Chief Officer Steering Group.  The role and responsibilities of YOTs and their Management Boards continue to be regulated by the National Standards for Youth Justice Services, which were extended and clarified in 'Modern Youth Offending Partnerships' Youth Justice Board 2013.

To meet the statutory requirements necessary structures and governance are in place within the Local Authority, as detailed below and shown in the organisation chart in appendix 1.

The YOT is located in the Early Help Service, which forms part of the Children and Young People's Department.  The Chair of the YOT Management Board is also the Assistant Director of Early Help Services, who reports to the Director of Children's Services and who in turn directly reports to the Chief Executive Officer of the Local Authority.

A newly appointed Service Manager is responsible for both the YOT and the Evidence Based Hub (EBH), which includes family group conferencing, outdoor education and oversight of the evidence based programmes delivered borough wide. 

The YOT experiences a low turnover of staff, with the majority of the team having been in post for a number of years.  This is as a result of investment in the workforce, good quality leadership and supervision by management, ensuring the YOT has a competent and experienced workforce. 

The YOT Management Board is fundamental in challenging and supporting the work of the Youth Justice Plan, alongside the performance and priorities of the team, ensuring that statutory partner agencies are also held to account and contributing effectively to the delivery of the outcomes.  It considers not only the national youth justice strategic objectives, but also local indicators and themed reports, including benchmarking against inspection reports.  

The YOT Management Board supports the YOT to overcome barriers and will also commission agencies and partners for bespoke work e.g. improving the voice of the child both within the YOT and the Board and since the arrangements for critical incident reporting no longer lie with the Youth Justice Board, reporting of these incidents also proceeds directly to the YOT Management Board.  

The YOT Management Board is responsible for maintaining oversight of the YOT budget, YJB Grant and any other funding, formally approving these on a quarterly basis, and seeking reassurance that the YOT complies with National Standards and information requirements for the secure estate. 





Prevention and Early Intervention

All YOTs have a statutory duty to prevent offending as well as reducing and preventing reoffending.  The Management Board have considered were support could be offered to prevent vulnerable young people entering the criminal youth justice system unnecessarily.

Rotherham is in a strong position in terms of prevention and early intervention, particularly as the YOT is already an important and integrated element of the Early Help offer. There are specialisms in the YOT that are not present elsewhere in the system, for example working with young people who display sexually harmful behaviour. Equally there is transferable learning that will be mutually beneficial to practitioners across the wider early help workforce, and those in the YOT, for example, working with the whole family, and working restoratively. The YOT also provides an important link into community-based and adult services such as South Yorkshire Police.

The YOT cohort is small and defined, but made up of some of the most vulnerable children, young people and families in the borough. If we get it right with this cohort, it will inform how we work with children and young people and families earlier, before more significant problems arise.











Safer Rotherham Partnership

There are six responsible authorities on the SRP Board, who have a legal duty to work in partnership to tackle crime, disorder, substance misuse, anti-social behaviour and other behaviour adversely affecting the environment and to reduce offending, including the Chair of the YOT Board, together with Police, Health and National Probation Service.  The SRP Plan was developed together with an annual Joint Strategic Intelligence Assessment (JSIA).  The JSIA identifies the priorities for the year by ascertaining key crime and disorder risks and threats to the community.

One of the key performance indicators for the SRP Board is Protecting Vulnerable Children and the measure is 'Rate of First Time Entrants into the Youth Justice System'.  There is also a link to Protecting Vulnerable Adults with the measure 'Number of entrants into the criminal justice system'.

In Rotherham, consultation with Young People has identified that young people would value 'more entertainment places' and 'more activities to do'.  These comments are captured in the Lifestyle Survey and in Ward Plans.  

In 2018/19 the YOT commissioned Rotherham United Community Sports Trust to work with young people from YOT to improve health and wellbeing outcomes, alongside building a positive relationship and increasing motivation to engage with education, training and employment (ETE)

Strategic Plans

* Rotherham Early Help Strategy 2016-2019
* Safer Rotherham Partnership Plan 2018 - 2021
* Joint Strategic Intelligence Analysis 2017: Evidence Base v2 2018
Preventing young people entering the youth justice system; Reducing First Time Entrants (FTE)


Chart1a. (above) shows the rate of First Time Entrants (FTEs) for Rotherham continues to fall.  Comparison data for South Yorkshire PCC showed a downward trend from 2017 to 2018 as do National figures. Rotherham continues to see a reduction in FTE (-27%) which is similar to our PCC region and significantly lower than those in our YOT family (-16%) and nationally (-19.6%).

Chart1b. above shows how the reduction in FTEs has fallen over the last four years, in Rotherham we can see that the rate of decline follows a similar trend to that of the South Yorkshire PCC whereas that of our YOT family is less steep a curve suggesting that the other YOTs are not experiencing such a dramatic reduction in FTE as we have experienced which is also evident in the national picture.

Chart 1c. (below) shows the outcomes across the year and it reveals there has been a significant reduction in YC and above outcomes between Q1 and Q4.  The guidance for YOTs is that young people should be offered the lowest outcome possible which takes into consideration their assessed risk, safety and wellbeing factors.

Number of First time Entrants (FTE) to Criminal Justice System by Outcome Type and LAC StatusQ1 (Measure - Jul17/Jun18)Q2 (Measure - Oct17/Sep18)Q3 (Measure - Jan18/Dec18)Q4 (Measure - Apr18/Mar19)TotalLACTotalLACTotalLACTotalLACYouth Caution1911509030Youth Conditional Caution1211329272Referral Order133825251Youth Rehabilitation Order21009200Detention and Training Order10000000Section 90-92 Detention00000000Other Outcome (Discharge/Fine etc.)20402000

Chart 1d. shows the LAC status of the offending cohort has increased as a percentage of the whole from 14% in Q1 to 20% in Q4, but represents just three young people due to the low numbers of young people in the cohort.


Chart1e. opposite illustrates the continued decline in FTE numbers throughout the year, although this is local data and, therefore, reports on the number of young people who have received a statutory order through the court.

In October 2018, Cabinet approved implementations of Phase 2 and 3 of the Early Help Strategy and an element of this work was to align YOT prevention work with the Triage function in Early Help, as well as introducing the Early Help Assessment into the YOT for cases in a prevention arena (YRD and YC only); in order to embed a whole family approach.  
Every assessment will still include an assessment of risk safety and wellbeing as well as desistance factors.  The new process has now been developed and is currently in test phase before going live imminently. This will require YOT workers to use EHM for case recording in addition to CORE; all staff have received training on the system, further updates will be provided as this work progresses however some impact on performance is anticipated as staff get used to the new systems and processes.


Reducing Re-offending

		
Charts 2a and 2b show that Rotherham is comparable to the South Yorkshire PCC which suggests that there is consistency across the police force in how offending is tackled from a policing perspective and the increase in re-offending rates was anticipated as the cohort of young people has reduced but become more complex and entrenched in their behaviours.  A review will take place of the current provision in Rotherham to ensure that as a YOT, interventions and delivery are adapted in order to reduce re-offending. In order to do this there will need to be a shift to strengthen factors for desistance by increasing aspirations and motivation to change.

Chart 2c Binary Rate of 
Re-offendingRe-offences per 
Re-offender Jul 15 -
Jun 16Jul 16 -
Jun 17Jul 15 -
Jun 16Jul 16 -
Jun 17Rotherham27.533.02.773.47South Yorkshire PCC31.334.33.433.97YOT Family40.640.23.913.87National41.639.83.823.96
Chart 2c highlights the number of young people in this cohort is relatively low it is worrying that the number of re-offences per young person is increasing (Chart 7). By contrast in our YOT family, and nationally, the figures are decreasing in both rate of reoffending rate and re-offences per reoffender.

Reducing the use of custody
Charts 3a and 3b (below) shows that Rotherham maintains custody rates that are well below national and regional figures. This represents a local decrease of 0.29 compared with decreases of 0.8 family, 0.07 nationally and 0.6 regionally. This marks the lowest rate of custody for five years. Feedback from the District Judge has been positive about the good quality of Rotherham's Reports, stating that they were child focused and insightful which helped to determine an appropriate sentence or sanction. Praise was also forthcoming  for our Court Officers who she found to be extremely knowledgeable, confident and reliable.  Social workers attending court for Looked after Children has increased significantly which makes the court process more efficient and also provides better outcomes for children.
Whilst custody numbers remain low, a number of young people have been remanded to the Care of the Local Authority in the year (not included in these figures) and whilst this is proportionate, we will be reviewing our alternatives to custody, such as Bail or YROs with Intensive Supervision and Surveillance (ISS) requirements to ensure they are robust.  
Rate of CustodyApr 14-Mar15Apr 15-Mar16Apr 16-Mar17Apr 17-Mar18Apr 18-Mar19Rotherham0.450.460.250.410.12South Yorkshire PCC0.520.350.280.290.23YOT Family0.430.410.390.280.20National0.440.410.440.380.31A report published by the Ministry of Justice for the reporting period April to June 2017 showed that 70.5% of young offenders released from custody reoffended within 12 months, with poor transition, lack of suitable accommodation and no ETE in place identified as some of the reasons for this figure. Locally, work has been undertaken to explore how to improve transition and work is taken place with a young person recently released from custody who has been able to share their views about what would have been helpful.  They are working with our voice and influence officer to produce a booklet for young people from Rotherham which will include key information; prospective employers/training providers, health services and relevant contact details etc. The booklet will be personalised with the individuals own aspirations and needs. 



















		

		


 

 



There were some ambitious targets set in the 2018 plan for the service.  This section provides an overview of performance.
Priority AreaActionHow did we do?
First Time Entrants

Discuss with Police the use of Youth Restorative Disposals and YOT involvement
The First Time Entrants rate (FTE) has reduced by 27% in the period Jan to Dec 2018. The latest verified FTE rate for the period Jan to Dec 2018 stands at 169 (41 young people).

We were part of a successful bid to address CCE with partners in Doncaster and Barnsley.  The bid led to significant funding and we are introducing work to counter CCE working with partner agencies.Reoffending
Use Youth Justice Board toolkit to analyse historical trends and build offending profile. 

Implement live tracking of offendingThe re offending live tracker is now in use and tracks a specified cohort in real time. 

Latest youth data set verified re-offending figures relate to the Jun 15- Jun 16 cohort and show a binary rate of 33% and offences per offender of 3.47.

Local data looking at the offending cohort of April 2018 to March 2019 (as at March 2019) shows a binary rate of 19.2% and offences per re offender as 2.9%.Rate of Custody
Monitor Quarterly and review all cases sentenced to custody to see if there are lessons to be learntThe custody rate for the period April 2018 to March 2019 is 0.12 and relates to 3 young people. This demonstrates a decrease of 0.29 on the previous 12 month period.

We have monitored those who have gone to custody and supported their resettlement.  We audited this cohort and implemented findings.  We have supported the SW Yorkshire resettlement consortia in their research into the cohort.Response to Thematic (Trauma)

Train YOT staff in trauma informed practiceAll YOT staff have now been trained in trauma informed practice and we have secured further funding via the sub-regional CCE bid to train 5 people across the CYPS workforce in the  'train the trainer' training in order to create a sustainable offer of workforce development.Response to Thematic (Social Media)Consult with other colleagues working in this area to understand issues and develop responsesBetween April 2018 and March 2019, 38 young people have attended Be Share Aware sessions. A further 16 sessions have been offered and not attended.
The YOT makes good use of its resources, whilst experiencing some reduction in recent years.  Despite changes resulting from transformation and budget reductions, overall staffing is stable.  
The YOT's main resource is staffing and the YJB grant is dedicated to providing a core Youth Justice service, in keeping with section 39(5) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. This includes qualified social workers and probation case managers holding high risk cases, and overseeing case managers qualified via the youth justice foundation degree, BA Hons Degree in Youth Justice or professional certificate.  

A dedicated Court Team oversees all court work and staff are trained in risk and vulnerability assessment, Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA), as well as child protection, thus ensuring the YOT's compliance with grant conditions.

Other funding is geared towards prevention services with Youth Justice Workers based in locality teams, alongside other early help colleagues and police officers.  It also resources our EBH which oversees the delivery of evidence based programmes including 'Triple P Parenting' and 'Parents as Partners' programmes.  

A major benefit of the YOT being located within the Early Help Service is the provision of further opportunities to make effective use of resources by joint working with Early Help and other colleagues, developing exit strategies and increasing the reach of preventative interventions and Early Help services.

The YOT also receives a small grant to provide a Junior Attendance Centre which is open on Saturdays.  In addition to being available as an Attendance Centre requirement, it also provides courses on crime and consequences and educational sessions on safe internet use for young people (Be Share Aware group) and a knife crime programme.



Table 2. Partner Contributions to YOT pooled budget 2018/19


AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Local Authority704,70685,00014,211803,917Police Service30,000030,000National Probation Service40,0005,00045,000Health Service90,00035,000125,000Police and crime commissioner150,000150,000YJB Practice Grant431,928431,928Other00Total734,706215,000635,5091,585,845

The YOT has developed and maintained a number of robust partnerships with statutory and non-statutory agencies. The Service Manager for YOT and the EBH works in partnership with South Yorkshire Regional YOT managers to ensure representation on a number of strategic forums, most notably;

* Local Criminal Justice Board, (LCJB)
* Strategic MAPPA Board
* Regional Reducing Re-offending Board
* Regional Restorative Justice/Integrated Offender Management 

The Service Manager for YOT and EBH is also a representative at a number of local boards, including;

* Child Sexual Exploitation Silver Group
* PREVENT Silver Group
* Consequence Management Group
* Rotherham Local Children's Safeguarding Board and sub-groups
* Child Exploitation Delivery Group
* Learning and Development Board
* Practice Review Board. 

In addition, the YOT is a stakeholder in the South and West Yorkshire Resettlement Consortium and Child Criminal Exploitation (CCE) Sub-Regional Steering Group.  Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council were successful in the EYIF bid to address the CCE with partners in Doncaster and Barnsley.   The bid led to significant funding and which will be used to introduce work to counter CCE by working with partner agencies. This work will include outreach and engagement, education in schools and therapeutic intervention from an assistant psychologist

The YOT has a close relationship with the voluntary sector, which is illustrated by the joint working undertaken with the Barnardo's Junction Project to assess and intervene in sexually harmful behaviour.  

The boards attended by the YOT Service Manager, described previously, allow for regular check and challenge across the partnership and ensure that the YOT is aligned with wider children's services, community safety partnership, health and well-being strategy and regional commissioned services. 

Partnerships maintained with statutory partners such as the Police, has resulted in joint decision making about out of court disposals based on YOT assessments and assisting in charge advice to CPS for sexually harmful offences.

Reparation and Victim Services are commissioned jointly between Rotherham, Sheffield, Doncaster and Barnsley YOTs.  Performance and quality is reviewed quarterly by the four YOT managers and the service provided is good.

The Service Manager of YOT has introduced a Risk Panel, which meets on a fortnightly basis with representatives from statutory partners; Police, Children's Social Care, Inclusion and Heath and also additional agencies, as required, to ensure that internal and external controls are in place to;

* manage risk of re-offending
* manage risk of serious harm 
* increase safety and wellbeing factors 

To ensure the strategic and operational practice between YOT and partners, who contribute to specialist services to support children is functioning and managed effectively, the YOT reports to the YOT Management Board and also the Safer Rotherham Partnership. 

The Youth Justice Operations Co-ordinator and/or lead worker attends the operational groups and practice forums and feeds back to the wider team to ensure that the YOT is up to date with current trends and sharing of good practice. 


Early Help and Participation and Voice and Influence Team

Consultation regularly takes place at the request of the YOT Board by the Early Help Voice and Influence Workers with young people and staff within the YOT to help increase the voice of young people within the service and within the Board.  The main priorities were:

1 Undertake a formal consultation activity with young people within the YOT over a period of six weeks at Eric Manns.

2 Review the current Self-Assessment document to endeavour to expand use of this.

3 Encourage young people into further Youth Voice opportunities.

As a result of this work there are several recommendations that have been actioned 

















.  













In the most recent YOT Management Board, further actions and recommendations have been agreed through consultation with young people:


1 The Early Help Voice and Influence team will meet with YOT staff and the YOT management board to develop a new co-working strategy and plan that will increase the voice of young people within the service and within the Board.

2 Young people are to be encouraged to access wider voice and influence initiatives such as The Youth Cabinet.

3 The development of a leaving custody information pack

4 Further development of peer to peer mentoring and the incarnation of a young people's action/steering group.

5 Develop creative ways in which the voice of young people can be heard and shared.






Whilst the Local Authority continues to face severe budgetary constraints, which impacts on all services, the YOT continues to deliver a good service to the community with reducing resources and increasing need.  This is not an issue that is faced solely by the Local Authority and the statutory partners are also facing similar difficulties.  As a result the YOT Management Board must consider alternative methods and solutions of delivery to a community where deprivation is high and delivery of the service is paramount.

Current performance by the YOT is assessed by the Management Board as being good and work continues to take place to challenge and review performance and local data to ensure that measures are in place to sustain this work and focus on any upcoming challenges.

There has been a sustained reduction in first time entrants to the criminal justice system over the last several years, although it is recognised that it is unlikely that the rate of reduction of the last few years will continue to be replicated and it is anticipated that the numbers of young people entering the system will start to stabilise.

The YOT Management Board acknowledges that although the numbers of young people re-offending continues to reduce, the percentage in the relevant cohort may rise.  This is due to the cohort reducing at a much faster pace and young people become increasingly more complex and entrenched in their behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that a review of the current provision is reviewed to enable the YOT to respond accordingly to the changing needs of the service, whilst focusing on strengthening desistence factors for sustaining change.

The levels of young people from a BAME background in the current cohort is monitored across all of the national youth justice strategic objectives and no concerns are currently identified.

The use of secure settings remains low, however, young people with speech, language and communication needs and learning difficulties are more likely to be disproportionately represented within the Youth Justice System, as well as having a more difficult time at school.  To mitigate this risk work is underway to gain a better understanding of this cohort locally, by assessing and collating data against this area of need and developing an action plan to further support young people to improve their educational outcomes.

Rotherham is keen to learn from colleagues and partners to understand and address serious Youth Violence and will be seeking to assess and review the data locally to identify those young people who have committed a violent offence and also those who may be at risk of exploitation. The findings from the sub-regional project (EPIC) will be utilised, in conjunction, with local data to ensure that the pathway for young people is responsive and effective, taking into account good practice from other agencies. 

Peer audits are applied to measure performance and progress against YJB national standards and inspection criteria.  The information from these audits is used to formulate an improvement plan to ensure our commitment to continuing reflection and improvement. 

The Young Inspectors continue to challenge the service and have carried out an inspection of the YOT, which is a welcome and important   inspection, carried out from a young person's perspective granting the service the invaluable insight as to what they feel is important.  

Themed multi-agency audits are carried out to encourage shared learning, collective responsibility and better outcomes for young people, together with learning and development opportunities for partners in Trauma Informed Practice to support the Child first, offender second principle.


From April 2018 - March 2019 'Remedi' contacted 192 victims of youth crime. 135 of these victims chose to take part in Restorative Justice. 223 indirect restorative processes were completed as well as 22 direct processes. The indirect processes were made up of communication between young people and their victims either by letter or via the Victim Contact Worker. The Direct processes were made up of victims directly meeting with the young people who offended against them or the young people completing direct reparation for their victim in order to repair the harm.     





Feedback from a victim of TWOC who took part in a direct restorative intervention.
The priorities moving forward are to continue to ensure that victim's views are at the heart of intervention plans with the aim to maintain and hopefully increase the 70% rate of victim engagement. There is also an aim to increase direct interventions as evidenced from speaking to both young people and victims that these often have the most impact for both parties. 
In this same period there were 61 young people referred to complete hours and Remedi organised 671 hours of reparation. The rate of attendance over the 12 month period was 60%. 
In 2018/19 there was a move to a more creative way of working in terms of reparation. In addition to using the long standing placements in Rotherham including Rotherham Hospice and Bluebell Wood, other great partnerships   were forged, for instance with Rotherham United Football Club. 
One of the biggest achievements last year was the "Step up Beat Hate" event which involved young people on reparation learning about hate crime and its effects. Young people took part in awareness raising sessions and also wrote poems and designed posters in order to highlight the issue. The practical side of the project included young people painting steps at the Rotherham United Football Club Stadium which is where the project found its name. The project culminated in an event at the stadium in August last year where many local professionals were invited to come and hear the young people speak about their experience and involvement in the project. Ex professional footballer Bruce Dyer and ex professional boxer Johnny Nelson were also speakers at the event and the Mayor of Rotherham attended and spoke at length to our young people.  The feedback from the young people who took part was overwhelmingly positive.   


A series of YOT Board Development Days have informed our priorities for the next two years. There will be a detailed action plan to track and monitor our progress and the plan will be reviewed quarterly by the Board.

Priority Area
ActionOwnerFirst Time EntrantsMonitor FTE levels and ensure that overall demand remains lower than National and YOT FamilyService Manager YOT & EBHTrack re-offending for those who receive a diversion  intervention and monitor performance by age, gender and offence typeService Manager YOT & EBH Re-offendingBuilding on the identified cohort of high risk re-offending young people, ensure that the priority group are effectively supported, utilising the live tracker for monitoring this cohort. Service Manager YOT & EBH & MI Team Reduce re-offences and re-offending rates by reviewing current programmes available to YP and expanding our current offer. EBH Coordinator & YOT Police OfficerIncrease number of parents accessing Evidence based parenting programmes from YOT Cohort . YJ Operations Coordinator EBH Coordinator & EBH CoordinatorCustody Develop a personal booklet for YP with details of services, ETE providers and health information to help with resettlement as suggested by a YP recently released from CustodyVoice and Inclusion Worker & YP Continue to monitor custody rates and ensure full multi-agency audit/review of all YP sentenced to custody (and at risk of custody) in 2019/20 Service Manager YOT & EBH, YOT Management Board Risk Introduce a Multi Agency Risk Panel (YMARAC) to review and manage risk in the community.Service Manager YOT & EBHTo break down the numbers of MAPPA eligible cases and ensure a process is set up to effectively and efficiently capture, screen and record decision making regarding level for all MAPPA eligible cases.Service Manager YOT & EBH and South Yorkshire Police Serious Youth Violence To review and compare Multi agency Data relating to Youth Violence from 2018/19 to ensure we have a clear picture of the cohort including the type, frequency and demographics of young people.YOT Management Board All YP perpetrating domestic abuse to be offered the 'Inspire to Change' Programme Community Safety and YJ Operations Coordinator All high risk domestic abuse reports to MASH will be progressed to a MADA (Multi Agency Domestic Abuse) meeting by 11am on the day of receipt to ensure a safety plan is in place immediately.  This will be particularly relevant where the perpetrators and victims are young people, and will ensure more timely support.  YOT will be present at the meeting   Acting Head of Service - First Response and Service Manager YOT & EBHHealth Develop an outline of a 'perfect pathway' for healthcare delivery to young people associated with the Youth Offending Service, which considers prevention and seeks the voice of young people where possible in that pathway. Service Manager YOT & EBHConsider the feasibility of implementing the 'perfect pathway' and look at the extent to which the 'perfect pathway' can be delivered through current service specification reviews. Rotherham CCG C&YP Commissioning ManagerRotherham CCG to consider benchmarking information from across the South Yorkshire and Bassetlaw area in order to  what the CCG offer is to the Youth Offending Service and Youth Offending Board. Rotherham CCG C&YP Commissioning ManagerFormalise the 'health offer' to the Youth Offending Service. 
Rotherham CCG C&YP Commissioning ManagerWork with NHS England to ensure that Rotherham young people receive high quality healthcare provision within YOI including secure estates, secure training centres.  Service Manager YOT & EBH and NHS England lead.Raising factors for desistance in relation to Education, Training & Employment; Raising aspirations, attainment  and attendance.To work closely with inclusion services and Schools to ensure young people have suitable education in place to Y11.Service Manager YOT & EBH & and HOS Inclusion Review and monitor exclusion data relating to YP age 10 - 16 for 6 months Sept 2019 - Mar 2020Service Manager YOT & EBH and  MI Team Develop an action plan to address the needs of children with Learning Difficulties and/ or speech and language needsService Manager YOT & EBH and HOS InclusionDevelop and implement key areas for action in relation to services for young people with SEND with colleagues across the system to support young people with SEN needs in the Youth Justice and Education Systems as part of the overarching strategic plan for services for children with SEND. Service Manager YOT & EBH and HOS Inclusion 'Barriers to learning' programme to be developed and delivered to encourage EET post 16. EBH CoordinatorEarly Help & Social Care Pathway 

Enabling a strong and robust Early Help Offer (& YOT) that delivers quality intervention and prevention.To develop an integrated pathway at front door that incorporates OoCD assessments and referrals Service Manager YOT & EBHTo embed multi-agency audits and shared responsibility for quality assurance of Early Help Assessments & ASSET plus assessments Service Manager YOT & EBHTo implement the Early Help Assessment closure form to capture service user voice at end of YOT interventionService Manager YOT & EBHImplement shadowing opportunities service wide by March 2020HOS Early Help Looked After ChildrenContinue to monitor our performance in supporting Looked After Children and reducing FTE and reoffending rates within this cohort.Service Manager YOT & EBHInspectionEnsure the YOT is performing at a 'good level' as outlined in the Inspection Framework.Service Manager YOT & EBH and YOT Management Board PracticeDevelop a detailed analysis of the cohort we work with and ensure that the board is aware of the nature of this cohortService Manager YOT & EBH and MI Team Service User VoiceEnsure that the Board understands the experiences of young people, parents and those affected by crime in Rotherham and develop improvement actions based on this feedback.Service Manager YOT & EBH and Voice and Influence Worker



Name and TitleOrganisationSignature
David McWilliams
Assistant Director of Early Help
Chair of YOT Management BoardRotherham Metropolitan Borough Council

Cllr Emma Hoddinott
Chair of Safer Rotherham Partnership

Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council


















AA Appropriate AdultMISManagement Information ServiceAC Attendance CentreMOJ Ministry of Justice ASBAnti-Social BehaviourNDTMSNational Drug Treatment Monitoring SystemAssetplus Assessment framework approved by YJB NEETNot in education, employment or trainingBSSBail Supervision and SupportPNC Police National Computer BAME Black or Asian Minority Ethnicity NOMSNational Offender Management ServiceCAMHS Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service NSNational StandardsCINChildren in NeedPACEPolice and Criminal Evidence ActCORE YOT database PNCPolice National ComputerCBO Criminal Behaviour Order (replaced ASBOs) PSR Pre-Sentence Report CPS Crown Prosecution Service RICRemanded in CustodyCPNCommunity Protection NoticeRJ Restorative Justice CRCCriminal Rehabilitation CompanyRLAARemanded to Local Authority AccommodationCSCChildren's Social CareROReferral Order CYPSChildren and Young People's ServicesSENDSpecial Educational Needs DTO Detention & Training Order (custodial court order) SSRSpecific Sentence ReportDTTODrug Treatment and Testing OrderSTC Secure Training Centre EHCPEducation, Health and Care Plan VLOVictim Liaison OfficerEHMEarly Help Module - DatabaseVS Victim Surcharge ETEEducation, Training and EmploymentYCYouth CautionFPN (police) Fixed Penalty NoticeYCCYouth Conditional CautionFTE First Time EntrantsYJBYouth Justice Board for England and Wales IDCPInitial Disclosure of Prosecution CaseYOI Young Offender institution ISOIndividual Support OrderYOT/YOS Youth Offending Team/Service ISS Intensive Surveillance and Supervision requirement YRO Youth Rehabilitation Order LAC Looked After Child YP Young Person MAPPA Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements 


Page 1 of 3


