


Salford
Youth Justice Service
Partnership 

Annual Business Plan
2019 - 2020


1. Introduction
The Salford Youth Justice Service Partnership business plan is produced for and submitted to the Youth Justice Board which monitors the work of Youth Offending Services. It details how Salford Youth Justice Service will deliver services to improve outcomes for children, young people, families, victims and communities over the next year. This plan should be read in conjunction with Salford's Children Services Plan, Salford City Plan and the Greater Manchester Youth Justice Services Strategic Plan. 
The aim of Salford Youth Justice Service remains focused on preventing offending and reoffending by children and young people.  This will be achieved by delivering an integrated service that ensures that children and young people are safeguarded and supported by robust risk management arrangements to protect the public and the victims of crime.
The Youth Justice Board monitors the performance of Youth Offending Services against three key performance indicators:
* The number of First Time Entrants to the Youth Justice System
* The number of young people supervised by the YJS who reoffend
* The number of young people receiving a custodial sentence 

Appendix 1 details the performance of Salford Youth Justice Service in these three areas over the last five years. 

In 2018/19, there continued to be a reduction in the number of Salford children and young people becoming First Time Entrants to the criminal justice system however there has been an increase in those receiving a custodial sentence compared to the previous three years. Examination of this data reveals that these young people committed violent offences and caused harm and distress to their victims and the community. There has been an increase in the use of weapons and knives. Almost a quarter of these young people had not previously been known to Salford Youth Justice Service. The latest Youth Justice Board data highlights a reduced reoffending rate in the cohort of young people tracked. 
Additional information is also provided to Salford Youth Justice Service strategic management board on a quarterly basis. This includes: 
* The number of looked after children and Care Leaver supervised by the YJS
* The level of engagement of young people in education, training or employment and percentage with an Education Health Care Plan
* The range of contact with victims and communities affected by crime and antisocial behaviour
* The number of young people remanded in custody  ( Appendix 5) 
* The number of young people involved in prevention contact and an Out of Court disposal
* The number of young people transitioned to the National Probation Service
* Profile of the young people involved with the service; age, gender, ethnicity, home area 

2. Progress on 2018/19 Priorities
* Salford Youth Crime Prevention Strategy 
The Salford Youth Crime Prevention Strategy has been agreed and its delivery is overseen by a multi-agency group who report to Salford's Community Safety Partnership Board.  The ambition is to reduce the number of Salford children and young people becoming involved in anti-social behaviour and offending. The impact of this strategy will be monitored against Salford's first time entrant and custody rate. In addition a multi-agency strategic group has been established to address the increase in Salford children and young people becoming involved in knife and violent crime. This work will be supported by the recent Home Office funding to address knife crime and serious violence. This group reports to Salford's Community Safety Partnership Board.
Given the high number of Looked After Children and care leavers involved with the Youth Justice Service an enhanced prevention offer is in place for these children and young people, this includes individual contact and the offer of restorative interventions.  



* Out of Court Disposal Arrangements  
The Greater Manchester Youth Justice Services and Greater Manchester Police have established an agreed approach to Out of Court Disposals. Salford Youth Justice Service staff have co-delivered briefings to Police colleagues to embed this approach. A Pre-Court assessment tool has been devised and this is used with all children, young people and their carers involved in this contact. 
This approach has been bench marked against the HMIP thematic inspection report, 'Out-of-court disposal work in youth offending teams', (March 2018).
 In 2018/19 almost 65% of Salford YJS case load was made up of prevention and out of court disposal contact. Reoffending rates within this cohort of young people was very low. More detailed analysis will be completed in 2019/20.  
*  Trauma and Resilience    
The Youth Justice Service secured funding from the Greater Manchester Health Transformational Fund to develop a Trauma and Resilience action plan in addition to a programme of training and learning opportunities to develop the workforce's understanding of approaches to adverse childhood experiences and trauma in families. The planning and review tools used with young people and their parents/carers have been adapted to ensure that they are strength based and resilience focused. Salford Council for Voluntary Services have been commissioned to employ a Social Prescriber hosted by the YJS. This worker supports families to take up social and wellbeing opportunities in their community with the purpose of addressing isolation, improving wellbeing and positive social contacts. 
The YJS has been asked to present the services approach to trauma and resilience at a number of events both in Salford and Greater Manchester.  
This work will be evaluated by public health colleagues commissioned by Greater Manchester Combined Authorities in the autumn. 



* Participation  
The YJS Participation policy has been revised to promote opportunities for young people, their parents and carers, victims and the communities to influence how the service is delivered. We encourage national and local researchers to meet with our service users and this research has explored issues in relation to the Courts, knife and hate crime, domestic abuse and child criminal exploitation.
 The promotion of reparation activities on the YJS Facebook page have been well received by the public and have led to a range of new opportunities for the service. These have included a number of charity events planned by young people including a 5k fun run. 
A group of young people are involved in a rugby project delivered by the Criminology department at Manchester Metropolitan University and they have co-facilitated a work shop at a recent international conference on participation held at the university. 
* Support to Families  

Salford YJS is accredited by the Restorative Justice Council. Staff have been trained to deliver mediation services to families involved with the service where this is assessed as appropriate. This offer has been extended to Salford's residential children homes, the care leavers service and schools. YJS staff also provide training for colleagues from a number of children service teams in restorative approaches. 

* Complex Safeguarding 
Salford's Complex Safeguarding Hub is now established and operating. In 2019/20, the operational links and co-working arrangements with the YJS will be further developed and strengthened.  






3. Service Structure and Governance Arrangements
The YJS in Salford is based within the Children Service Directorate and has strong links to the Salford Community Safety Partnership. The service operates from a single base and is made up of a multi-disciplinary staff group, organised into four teams - see Appendix 2 Organisation Chart. The head of the YJS is line- managed by the Assistant Director for Specialist Children Services.  
In addition to providing performance data to the Youth Justice Board on a quarterly basis, Salford YJS provides information for the Children Services Plan, the 0 - 25 Plan and the City Plan.
Salford YJS is overseen by a Partnership Strategic Board which meets on a quarterly basis and is chaired by Salford's Director of People. Appendix 3 provides details of the membership and the organisations that they represent. 
Performance information and financial updates are presented at the quarterly strategic board meetings. This details the YJS compliance with the submission of performance data, Secure Estate placement information, completion of national standards audits and procedures for reviewing community safeguarding / public protection incidents. 
4. Resources and value for money: 
Salford Youth Justice Service is funded by the Youth Justice Board Good Practice Grant with additional financial and staffing contributions from the local authority and a range of partners. Please refer to Appendix 4. These contributions will be used exclusively to deliver the statutory Youth Justice Service in Salford and to support the priorities detailed in section 6 of this plan. The YJB Good Practice Grant will be used for management development, practitioner training, volunteer expenses and service user initiatives and developing interventions and research opportunities. 
Salford Youth Justice Service is fully compliant with the staffing requirements set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.This includes a Police Officer, a range of health professionals, representatives from the National Probation Service and Children Services.


5. Partnership Arrangements
The collaborative approach taken by the Greater Manchester Youth Justice Services has led to a GM Youth Justice Service plan of which the head of Salford YJS the lead on Court and staff development. The head of service also represents GM YOS colleagues on the Local Criminal Justice Board (LCJB) for Greater Manchester and co-chairs the national Youth Justice Service Improvement Group.  
Salford YJS is integrated into local partnership arrangements for children / young people and criminal justice services. The YJS Manager is a member of the Salford Violence Against Women and Girls Board, CSE steering group, Reoffending Board, Community Safety Partnership Board, Looked After Children Executive Board, Children and Families Board (SEND) and The Serious Case Review Group. 
The head of the YJS regularly meets with senior officers from the National Probation Service, HM Court Services, and Greater Manchester Police, health and local authority commissioners, Connexions, Barnardo's and Salford's Council of Voluntary Services to review and develop our coordinated approach to service delivery.
Salford YJS operational managers and specialist practitioners are involved with colleagues in Salford and Greater Manchester to develop joint responses in key areas of service delivery, developments and quality assurance. These include: resettlement, Courts, sexually harmful behaviour, restorative justice, Prevent, ASSET Plus, peer case audits, emotional wellbeing, ETE and Speech and Language.







6. Priorities for 2019 - 20
* Prevention

The YJS will actively promote Salford's Youth Crime Prevention strategy and will work with partners to develop the opportunities, interventions and support available to families and colleagues, to deter children and young people becoming involved in anti-social behaviour and offending. 

The YJS will be proactive with a targeted prevention offer to Looked After Children and care leavers, aiming to reduce the number that become involved in the criminal justice system.  

 
*  Serious Youth Violence and Knife Crime 
It is essential that Salford YJS continues to collaborate with partners in the city to better understand the complex issues that underlie serious youth violence and knife crime and to use specific Home Office funds to effectively address this challenge. 

*  Complex Safeguarding
Over the next twelve months the YJS will confirm its operating arrangements with Salford's Complex Safeguarding Hub, to ensure that there is a robust and collaborative response to child sexual and criminal exploitation. 







*  Improve Education Outcomes
The YJS workforce and colleagues from education will further develop their knowledge and confidence, to ensure they are able to effectively advocate for young people to receive the most appropriate education that meets their specific needs to ensure they achieve qualifications that will support them to access vocational training and employment opportunities.
*  Resettlement
There has been an increase in the number of Salford young people receiving custodial sentences due to the violent nature of their offending. It is important the YJS has a robust resettlement response to support the return of these young people to the community and to prevent further offending. The Salford YJS resettlement policy will therefore be revised in collaboration with partners to enhance the offer made to young people and their families/carers to assist in this process.  
The YJS has secured funding from the Home Office Knife and Violent Crime fund, to commission a third sector organisation, to employ a mentor. They will visit all young people in custody regularly and offer an enhanced level of support with individualised resettlement plans.  
*  Problem Solving Court Pilot 

From August 2019, the YJS and the Greater Manchester Youth Court Bench will be involved in a twelve month Problem Solving Court pilot. This will involve Magistrates who will also participate in monthly review meetings held with those young people subject to Intensive Support and Surveillance conditions and their parents or carers, to support compliance and progress. 






7. Workforce Development
The YJS has an annual workforce development plan which includes the following priorities for 2019/20:

* Childhood trauma and resilience 
* Complex safeguarding issues
* Young people and their right to appropriate education 
* ASSET Plus refresher 
* Management Oversight 
* Responses from the findings from Q/A and case audits 

All staff participate in an annual appraisal, individual supervision, and the opportunity to be involved in peer and specialist sexually inappropriate/harmful group supervision. This supports staff to complete the range of tasks required to effectively undertake their duties and contribute to the priorities set for this year. Training and development opportunities include:

* Youth Justice Interactive Learning Space 
* Greater Manchester YJS Training Partnership & Peer Support 
* Salford Safeguarding Children's Board
* Manchester Metropolitan University events
* Input from  partners and community organisations
* In-house events 

Salford YJS has an annual staff away-day and attendance at monthly service meetings and team meetings is mandatory. Staff are also encouraged to lead on particular aspects of the service, this includes working with girls, missing from home, Looked after Children, and participation. 

The YJS has two qualified practice teachers available to supervise social work students undertaking their final social work placement. The YJS Nurse, Speech and Language Therapist and CAMHS practitioner also take students on placements and facilitate shadowing opportunities. Annually a final-year, criminology student from Manchester Metropolitan University will complete their final dissertation using YJS data and interviews with service users and staff. The next dissertation will focus on serious youth violence.
The YJS currently has fourteen volunteers who lead the Referral Order panels and are involved in individual and group activities with young people and parents. . They attend quarterly group supervision and have access to shadowing opportunities with YJS staff and are invited to YJS training sessions.     
8. Monitoring and Reviewing Progress
This business plan will translate to an action plan which is reviewed at YJS management meetings and monitored with the Assistant Director of Specialist Children Services. Quarterly reviews are submitted to the YJS strategic board which details progress and challenges throughout the year.  

9. Risk to Future Delivery and Youth Justice Outcome Measures

Greater Manchester, along with eighteen other areas nationally, has been identified by the Home Office for additional funds to address knife and violent crime. A significant proportion of this funding has been given to the Police. An increase in Police activity may result in more children and young people becoming involved with the YJS. At this time no additional resources have been identified for the YJS to supervise and deliver interventions to those young people. 
Young people serving custodial sentences are located a significant distance from home. This has a negative impact on the ability of family and carers to maintain regular contact and represents a challenge to the YJS ability to deliver an effective resettlement service. There has been an increase in the number of young people serving a custodial sentence in the last three years. See Appendix 1. A significant number of these young people have experience of the care system or have been involved in child protection procedures therefore their successful resettlement is particularly challenging.  

The demand on remand beds remains unpredictable despite case-tracking and the establishment of regular meetings with representatives from the Courts. Last year this budget was overspent by £224,163- Appendix 5




Signed:						Date: 	1/8/19				
Kay Davidson - Youth Offending Service Principle Manager 



Signed
Charlotte Ramsden - Chair of Salford Youth Offending Service Management Board  	Date: 	19/8/19				




















Appendix 1: Key Performance Indicators over the last 5 years.


Reporting Period

First Time Entrants
Reoffending Rate
Custodial Sentences
2014/2015

101
April 14 - June 14 
No in cohort 267
No reoffending 95
No of offences 331
Rate of reoffending 35.6%
30
2015/2016
91April 15 - June 15 
No in cohort 51
No reoffending 24
No of offences 93
Rate of reoffending 47.1%
22

2016/2017

89April 16 - June 16
No in cohort 34
No reoffending 17
No of offences 59
Rate of reoffending 50.0%
12
2017/18
85April 17 - June 17
No in cohort 34
No reoffending 13
No of offences 76
Rate of reoffending 38.2%
18
2018/19
69

Not Available 

25Appendix 2: YJS Organisational Chart

Appendix 3: Management Board Members 

* Director of Children Services (Chair) - Charlotte Ramsden 

* National Probation Service  (Deputy Chair) - Manjit Byrne 

* Assistant Director Of Specialist Children Services - Sharon Hubber 

* Head of Looked After Children Service - Mike Kelly 

* Service Manager Next Steps - Phil Varghese
 
* Greater Manchester Police - Lee Hopwood

* Salford Royal Foundation Trust - Michelle Ward & Agnes Leopold-James

* Community Safety Partnership - Jeanette Staley 

* Connexions  - Diane Sproson 

* Chair of Manchester & Salford Youth  Court Bench  - Carol Green 

* Chair of SHAPAS -   Debbie Ramsey 

*  Area Manager - Early Break  - Janine Day
  
* Elected member - Cllr John Walsh 





Appendix 4: Finances 

AgencyStaffing 
Costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated
Funds (£)Total (£)Local Authority 115,000455,038570,038Police Service 27,50027,500National Probation Service 44,4317,00051,431Health Service (CCG)48,10048,100Police and Crime Commissioner YJB Practice Grant 506,294506,294Welsh Government Other:

* GMCA
* GM Health Transformational Fund 
 

45,000
50,000



95,000
Total:
 
£235,031
£1,063,332
£1,298,363



Appendix 5:  Remand Nights 

* 2018 to 2019 : Budget £63,663
EstablishmentTotal Number of NightsCostsSecure Children HomeSecure Training Centre 253£138, 138YOI 792£149,688Total 1,045£287,826

* 2017 to 2018 : Budget £67,607

EstablishmentTotal Number of NightsCostsSecure Children Home 00Secure Training Centre 271£145,256YOI109£20,819Total 380£166,075




* 2016 to 2017 : Budget £75,322

Establishment Total Number of NightsCostSecure Children Home 0Secure Training Centre 46£22,540YOI 262£46,374Total 308£68,914


* 2015 to 2016 : Budget £113,410
EstablishmentTotal Number of NightsCostSecure Children Home 44£24,596Secure Training Centre 00YOI 343£58,941Total 387£83,537
1


