
Sandwell Youth Justice Plan 2019/20












Contents
																				Page
Introduction (community safety strategy)				3
Introduction to the Youth Justice Plan				5
Sandwell: Contextual Information					6
Serious Youth Violence and Exploitation:			8
Disproportionality							9

Partnership achievements in 2018/9				9

Key progress for the YOS since the 2018/19 Youth           	 10
Justice Plan

Sandwell Offending Data						12

Voice of the child and parents					15

Priorities for 19/20							16

Structure and Governance						17

Working in Partnership						20

Finance: 2019/20 funding						23

Risks and Challenges						23

Appendix A: HMIP action plan					25

Appendix B: Staffing						30





	


  Introduction from the overarching Community Safety Strategy 
      2019-2021

2018 was a year of change for the Safer Sandwell Partnership Police and Crime Board. In 2017, we used a peer review to take a close look at the changing nature of crime, keeping our communities safe, our priorities for the future and the resources we have available to us. We recognised some great work taking place at operational level and some good strategic work, but we also realised we needed to be better in working across organisations and managing different kinds of risks relating to the nature and threat of modern crime.

Over the past five years or so, we have seen a rise in types of crime in which people are exploited, including slavery, domestic abuse, sexual exploitation and recruitment of children into distributing drugs. These crimes particularly affect children, the most vulnerable people in our borough. We've also seen a rise in violent crime and in drug-related crime. Anti-social behaviour has also begun to increase again after a period during which it remained low.

So, in response, the Safer Sandwell Partnership has introduced some changes to the way we operate and are governed. During 2018/19, we have begun to embed these following in the way we do business.

* We've brought back Tasking to the centre of our work. Tasking is the basic work of getting things done collaboratively and quickly - so they don't escalate into bigger problems - and properly, so the solutions last.
* We've also recognised that we need to focus more effort on preventing violence and exploitation of many kinds, including sexual exploitation, modern slavery and human trafficking, many forms of domestic abuse, and the exploitation of young people into criminal behaviour, such as with 'county lines'. A new sub board is already focusing on this work.
* Serious organised crime is behind many of the modern crimes we now see in Sandwell, so we've also brought together a new sub board to work on reducing offending and serious organised crime
* We will continue to maintain our focus on victims of crime.
This is a change in emphasis rather than a change of direction, but we now expect to be more effective and efficient in responding to crime and ASB, and in supporting the most vulnerable residents. We have all heard about reduced resources available across all agencies, but we remain committed to doing a great job with the resources we have, ensuring that they are used effectively and continue to value the contributions of the public and all our partners in helping us to achieve this. 

We expect that some of the Board's previous operational groups will continue to bring key people together to tackle these issues we must address, and that others will be discontinued. We will keep this process of change and the number of meetings we hold under review to ensure we are as efficient as possible.

Our vision is unchanged:

To ensure that the communities of Sandwell feel safe, protected and confident in their homes and neighbourhoods

Our priorities for 2019-21 are:
* Work together to prevent and reduce crime and anti-social behaviour in our neighbourhoods (Tasking)
* Prevent violence and exploitation
* Reduce offending, reoffending and serious organised crime
* Protect and support vulnerable victims
Our priorities contribute to the Sandwell 2030 Vision and its 10 ambitions. Ambition 5 is at the heart of our work, strategy and plan.




Please take a look at our webpages which tell you much more about our work.

www.sandwell.gov.uk/safersandwell 

Chief Superintendent Richard Youds.


Introduction to the Youth Justice Plan:

This Youth Justice Plan supports the strategic aims of the Sandwell Youth Justice Board, the Safer Sandwell Partnership Police & Crime Board (SSPPCB), Sandwell's Ambition 2030 and the Black Country Reducing Reoffending Strategy.

It outlines our approach and activity aimed at:
* reducing youth offending and reoffending across Sandwell for all young people aged between 10-17
* providing opportunities to engage children and young people in positive activities including education, employment and training
* Engaging families and communities to support this

This youth justice plan forms part of the statutory requirements of a Youth Offending Service under Section 40 of the Crime and Disorder Act.  This Plan is reported to our Youth Offending Service Management Board, and to the SSPPCB. It contributes to all of the SSPPCB key priorities.

Youth Offending Teams were established under the statutory provisions of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 with the principal aim to prevent offending and reoffending by children and young people aged 10-17.

The Act imposed a duty on each local authority to ensure that youth justice services are provided in each area, and placed Police, Probation and Health as statutory partners within a multi-agency approach to delivering these services.

Subsequent legislation including the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008, and more recently the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders (LASPO) Act 2012, have made significant changes to the responsibilities of a Youth Offending Service. 

Sandwell YOS continues to evolve its service to meet the needs of the young people it works with as well as meet the challenge of issues such as serious youth violence.  We were proud to be inspected as 'Good' in our recent inspection, and welcome the new National standards with the encouraging Youth Justice Board focus on the 'child first' principle.  As of April 2018, the YOS itself has been part of the newly established Sandwell Children's Trust but continues to form a key part of the partnership response to reducing youth crime.
Within this document you will find details of performance, financial information, structure and governance, partnership arrangements, achievements and challenges, and a sense of our priorities for the forthcoming year.    We hope you find it interesting and informative.

Sandwell: Contextual Information

About Sandwell:    Sandwell is a metropolitan borough which was formed in 1974, and is one of seven authorities that makes up the West Midlands conurbation. The Sandwell Borough comprises of 6 towns - Oldbury, Rowley Regis, Smethwick, Tipton, Wednesbury and West Bromwich.
Population:    Sandwell has a population of 319,455 (latest estimate). The population of the area fell considerably from the late 1960s until the early 2000s, however this trend has now been reversed, and there has been an increase of around 29,700 since 2001. Between 2001 and 2014 the population is estimated to have increased by 32,100 (+11.3%). This is higher than the rate of increase for England (+9.8%).  The latest official projections show a projected further increase of 26,800 between 2014 and 2024 in Sandwell and an increase of 61,300 between 2014 and 2039 (Office for National Statistics).   
Ethnicity:    Sandwell is an ethnically diverse borough, in the ten years between 2001 and 2011, the White British population decreased from 78% to 65.8%. The White 'Other' category, (excluding Irish) has increased by 78% to 10,463. The Asian groups, including Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi, Chinese and Other Asian, account for 19.2% of the population. All of Sandwell's minority ethnic groups have larger proportions of young people and fewer older people than the white population.  Children and young people under the age of 20 years make up 27.0% of the population of Sandwell. 51.0% of school children are from a minority ethnic group.
Health:    In absolute terms, health in Sandwell has been improving over time, though at a slower rate than the country as a whole. Life expectancy in Sandwell is 76.8 years for men and 81.3 for women, compared to the national figures for England of 79.2 and 83.0 years respectively (3 year rolling average 2010/12).  Children in Sandwell have higher than average levels of obesity: 11.1% of children in Reception (aged 4-5years) and 25.7% of children in Year 6 (aged 10-11) are classified as obese. The teenage pregnancy rate in Sandwell is higher than the England average. In 2010/11, 2.3% of all births were to teenage girls, higher than the England average. However Sandwell has established a downward trend and reduced inequalities across some high conception rate wards. Despite 24% reduction over the past decade the 2011 rate of teenage conceptions was 46.1 which remains higher than the England average. 
Economy:   In Sandwell (Oct 2015) 6,430 people claimed Job Seekers Allowance (JSA), which accounts for 3.2% of the local working age population (16-64) compared to 2.9% (West Midlands) and 1.5% (England & Wales). According to the latest HMRC figures, in August 2010 Sandwell had 29.6% of their children population living in what is considered "relative" poverty . This represents 22,935 dependent children, of which 19,930 (87%) are under 16 years of age. This is an increase of 1,300 children in poverty from the 21,635 children recorded in 2006. The 2011 score represents a decrease of 0.5% from the 2010 figure (30.4%), this is a lower rate than in 2006, when the measure began.
Sandwell's ranking on the average deprivation score is 13th most deprived local authority out of a total of 326. 
Environment:    Sandwell has an area of 8,600ha and is at the centre of both the motorway network and local conurbation, meaning there is heavy traffic crossing the borough. Sandwell however has the highest proportion of its area given to parks and open spaces of any of the West Midlands Metropolitan Districts.
 (source: www.sandwelltrends.info and www.chimat.org.uk)


Serious Youth Violence and Exploitation:

As in many areas Sandwell has had to respond to the challenge of serious youth violence and themes of exploitation.   The partnership acknowledges the seriousness and importance of these issues and has the prevention of violence and exploitation as a key multi-agency priority.

All four strategic boards have committed to the prevention of violence and exploitation as a priority.  The Sandwell Children's Safeguarding Partnership's  multi-agency conference focused on various exploitation forms including sexual and criminal exploitation and is offering multi-agency training.  There is a strategic exploitation group chaired by the Chief Executive of the Trust and the partnership have moved from a focus on CSE to broader exploitation through the development of the Exploitation Hub and an exploitation team to support those deemed most vulnerable in Sandwell.  A more contextual understanding of safeguarding is a focus and training is being applied on these issues across the partnership.

In terms of prevention, SMBC appointed a Prevention of Violence and Exploitation Programme Manager in January 2019 to help develop a PoVE Delivery Plan. This overarching plan is owned by all 4 Strategic Boards in Sandwell and key priorities for  2019/20 include: 

* Public Place Violence
* Impact of Alcohol and Drugs
* Domestic Abuse
* Vulnerable Adults
* Child Exploitation (Including Community Schools)
* Prevent
* Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE's)
* Modern Slavery
Sandwell has been awarded £178,000 from the Early Intervention Youth Fund and a consortium of voluntary sector partners are delivering a variety of targeted interventions aimed at young people and their families who are already involved in offending and those deemed at risk. 

With regard to knife crime, Police and partners responded quickly and effectively to the national increase in knife crime. Our strong links with local schools  enabled school link officers to deliver inputs to 1,750 students, raising awareness and resulting in knives being seized and/or  surrendered from schools. Letters were also sent to parents of persons suspected to be involved with knifes and importantly the YOS contributed to letters via the advice of the Speech and Language Therapist in helping to make them more understandable to their target audience.

Specifically for the YOS, Sandwell was invited to form part of the YJB's working group on Serious Youth Violence.  From that, we were fortunate enough to access a supplementary grant to pilot the increased use of arts with our young people.  A more detailed report is included in Appendix X and we await a formal evaluation of this project from the University of Wolverhampton which is due in September 2019.    

We aim to complete and utilise the upcoming YJB SYB checklist to understand and enhance our response and will aim to ensure the YOS is a key contributor to the development of the Violence Reduction Units as that concept becomes clearer.


Disproportionality:

Sandwell were asked to the 2018 Youth Justice Conference to be part of the workshop on disproportionality as an example of a YOS trying hard to understand this issue and develop their service accordingly.  An ongoing focus on engagement, understanding and innovation around the over-representation of black young men in the YOS cohort will continue in 2019/20 and in line with our HMIP recommendation the Youth Justice Partnership is considering how it can better understand the longer term causes of the over-representation and use YOS data to influence the broader partnership response.

As noted in the achievements section, the YOS has continued to work with a community engagement specialist organisation '1st Class Legacy' to build on the 'Kitchen Table Talks' project as a peer support network for parents, and a positive feedback loop with the YOS to develop the service.  

We retain a commitment to the use of mentors for young people, and we continue to look for innovative ideas and funding streams to support activity around the better engagement of black young people in the youth justice system.  The Arts project is just one example and we continue to work towards our 'Artsmark' award.  


Partnership achievements in 2018/9:

Sandwell has a very broad partnership of agencies and communities working in every town, neighbourhood and community to prevent crime and abuse, and to protect people against the many threats that they face. A key element of our work over the last three years has been awareness raising of staff and residents of many new threats and risks to safety.

We encourage you to read about the many successes of the partnership, which can be accessed via:

http://www.sandwell.gov.uk/downloads/file/27998/safer_sandwell_partnership_community_safety_strategy_and_delivery_plan_2019-21


Key progress for the YOS since the 2018/19 Youth Justice Plan:

Sandwell YOS received its inspection from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation in August 2018.  The report, published in November 2018 rated the service overall as 'Good' and commented that

"We found the YOS to be creative in its engagement with children and young people, and it provided an excellent range of interventions to support desistance from offending. The work with court orders was good; assessments and planning that looked at a child's safety and wellbeing and their risk of harm to others were outstanding."

The Sandwell partnership was very proud of this achievement which reflects the hard work of all involved in trying to support young people live lives away from crime.  We welcomed the judgement, and acknowledged the recommendations we received which included:

The Chair of the YOS Management Board should:
1. make sure that the Management Board is effective in setting the direction
and strategy for the work of the YOS and improve its engagement with
frontline staff.

The YOS Management Board should:
2. identify and minimise the impact of discrimination and disadvantage in the
criminal justice system, especially for children and young people from a black
and minority ethnic background.

The YOS Manager should:

3. ensure that assessing and planning for work in out-of-court disposals are of a good quality and manage the risk of harm to others, address safety and
wellbeing factors and meet the needs of the child or young person
4. develop the YOS's victim and restorative justice processes to make certain
that the needs of potential and actual victims and opportunities for
restorative justice.

These recommendations have formed the basis our post Inspection action plan which is being tracked through the YOS board.    The full HMIP report is available at: https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2018/10/Inspection-of-youth-offending-services-in-Sandwell-report.pdf) and we also continue to learn from the Inspections of other YOTs and HMIP thematic inspections as they are released.


Other key areas of progress:


Notable achievement: Awards and national profile

Sandwell YOS won the national 'Shine a Light' award for youth justice, recognising the strong work to support young people with speech language and communication needs.   A focus on the importance of speech and language support within the YOS is in Appendix ... 



The YOS also shared the award for 'Team of the Year' in the 1st annual Sandwell Children's Trust awards, and came runner up in the AYM John Hawkins Innovation award for the Popular Opinion Leaders project which focused on mentoring. 

In terms of Sandwells' profile on national platforms, we were proud to be asked to be part of the Youth Justice Board's workshop on disproportionality as an example of good practice which included direct feedback from young people and a parent on their experience of working with the YOS and other criminal justice agencies.

Sandwell were also asked to discuss their arts project at the National Criminal Justice Arts Alliance conference in Birmingham as an example of good practice, and more recently at the Institute of Research and Development in Wolverhampton.




Sandwell Offending Data:

At the end of the financial year 2018/19, Sandwell's offences with a substantive outcome had decreased from 562 offences to 557 offences compared to 2017/18. 

The five most common offences for a young person attending Court in 2018/19 were:

Violence against the Person (27.9%)
Robbery (11.5%) 
Motoring Offences (11%
Drugs (7.6%)
Theft & Handling Stolen Goods (6.5%)

Disposals:  There were 252 disposals in 2018/19 compared to 369 in the period 2010/11.  This equates to a 31.7% reduction.  

Interventions:  The majority of the interventions that were worked with at the YOS in 2018/19 were Referral Orders and Youth Rehabilitation Orders, making up for 30.3% and 29% of the caseload.

Disproportionality: The profile of the offending Sandwell young people included 87 white young people between 11 - 17 years (45.6% of the cohort), and black young people (20.9%).  Sandwell YOS has an over representation in the Black and Mixed Ethnic Groups which is particularly noticeable in the custody cohort.  This situation continues to improve in terms of actual numbers, but the trends remain which is why the YOS Management Board continues to focus on this area of work as a priority.

Ethnicity% of Offending Young People10 -17 Population% Under or Over RepresentedWhite45.6%62%16.4% UnderBlack20.9%7%13.9% OverMixed12.1%7%5.1% OverAsian9.9%23%13.1% UnderChinese/Other1.6%1%0.6% Over
Unknown
9.9%
First Time Entrants:






The number of first time entrants (FTEs) continues it long term downwards trend with 79 FTEs in 2018, compared to 117 in year prior to this.  Measured by the rate of FTEs per 100,000 of the population, Sandwell is at 240, which is now only higher than the national average of 236, but far lower than the West Midlands PCC Area rate (308).















Use of Custody:




As can be seen from the above graph, Sandwell has shown a decrease in the custody rate per 1,000 cohort in 2018/19 to 0.73 compared to the previous year.  In terms of actual numbers, this equates to 16 young people sentenced to custody in the first six months of 2018 compared to 10 in the period of Jan-June 2019.  Disproportionality remains an issue which we are actively looking into.  We acknowledge that Sandwell has a custody rate which is far higher than the national and regional average and we are focusing on understanding the complex interplay of the longer term issues and themes behind this as well as day to day YOS practice.  This remains a key focus on the Youth Justice Partnership Board.

Re-offending Rates:



The YJB has changed how they analyse and publish the rates of young people who reoffend to a quarterly cohort as shown in the graph.  For April - June 17 in Sandwell the cohort was 67 of which 26 (38.8%) reoffended, committing 83 offences.  This equates to 3.19 offences per reoffender (1.24 per offender in cohort).   
The current rate is higher than we would want it to be, and the YOS does not shy away from the challenges associated with a cohort of young people with more complex needs.  We are trying to connect the YOS into the broader safeguarding framework and have put considerable effort into our engagement with young people and have an impressive range of services to support this including Speech and Language Therapy, Mentors, Emotional Wellbeing support, Connexions and Literacy support.  




Voice of the child and parents:

Sandwell's overarching youth engagement is called the SHAPE programme.  SHAPE's objective is to listen to the voice of children and young people in Sandwell using five themes:
•	Staying Safe
•	Being Healthy
•	Enjoying and Achieving
•	Making a Positive Contribution
•	Economic Wellbeing
The SHAPE youth forum provides the opportunity for young people to meet other young people from across the Borough, organise SHAPE Events and act as a consultation group for Sandwell Council services and partner agencies. The SHAPE Programme organises events throughout the year for children and young people.

The YOS aims to consult and gain feedback from young people on their individual contact with the YOS, but also to inform key developments.  A recent example of meaningful consultation on service provision was the survey on the sorts of arts provision they would like to see the YOS offer.

With regard to parents, in conjunction with a community organisation, the YOS offers Kitchen Table Talks which we think is an innovative way of a Youth Offending Service engaging with parents.  It is an informal, supportive space for parents whose children are in the youth justice system to share experiences, learn from each other, build confidence and reduce their feelings of isolation.  It also builds a bridge between those parents and the youth offending service creating a feedback loop for service improvement and new ideas.





Priorities for 19/20:

* HMIP Post Inspection Action plan which includes:
o Progressing governance arrangements and understanding the YOS's place in the strategic landscape.
o Understanding disproportionality and the role of the wider system in contributing to this issue
o Improvement of Out of Court Disposals
o Consideration of the restorative justice offer 

* Completion of the National Standards Self Assessment between September 2019 and March 2020

* Maintaining our focus on the use of arts with young people and continuing our journey towards being a 'Creative YOS'

* Being a key contributor to the developing strategy around Prevention of Violence and Exploitation (a strategic priority for the 4 boards).  Specifically for 19/20 this will be understanding our role in the partnership response to exploitation and focusing on young people who are either being exploited or at risk of exploitation.  This will include utilising the YJB SYV checklist as a driver for activity.

* Understanding patterns and longer themes behind serious offending to influence the broader partnership and prevention activity.







Structure and Governance:




Fig 1. Current structure

* Part time staff 

















Governance:

The YJB document 'Modern youth Offending Partnerships' (2013) indicated that the local YOT governance board is:
'likely to be most effective where it is seen as the lead governance body for the local youth justice system and not simply as the youth offending team management board.'

Sandwell YOS Management Board has therefore had detailed discussions to clarify governance and purpose.    An agreement to function as the Sandwell Youth Justice Partnership Board has been established to fulfil the expectations set out in Modern Youth Offending Partnerships and respond to the recommendations of the single inspection carried out by Her Majesty's inspectorate of Probation in 2018.   Terms of Reference and membership are being confirmed.

It is envisaged that the YOS fits into the local, national and regional landscape as follows:

LOCAL:



Regional:



National:






Working in Partnership 

Statutory Partners to the YOS:

Children's Social Care:

Sandwell Children's Trust was officially launched on Sunday April 1st 2018. And delivers children's social care and targeted services to support children, young people and families in Sandwell.   Operational responsibility for the YOS is within the Trust, and the YOS is aligned and committed to the Trust's purpose of improving the lives of children and young people by:

* Listening, learning and caring
* Being ambitious and confident
* Encourage innovation
* Acting with openness and transparency

The Children's Trust is represented on the Youth Justice Partnership Board through the Chief Executive and Director of Operations.   There is a commitment to ensuring the YOS has an integral role in the overall improvement journey and to the provision of high quality services to the children of Sandwell.

Police:

The Police have made significant investment in early help and continue to provide a team of offender managers who work closely with YOS staff in a range of situations.  The youth crime officer has been retained, but the flexibility provided by an early help police team who spend significant time in the YOS, has allowed for considerable innovation and collaboration in approach from pre-court to custody.  The YOS and Police have worked closely together on a number of projects and the Youth Justice Partnership will be chaired by the Superintendent.

Probation:

The National Probation Service provide a seconded member of staff, which will continue into 2019/20.  The Transition to Adulthood (T2A) model is being refreshed by both agencies to try and improve the transition experience as young people move from youth justice to adult justice systems.    The Head of the Black Country HMPPS will continue to attend the YOS Board and is leading on one element of the National Standards self-assessment.
 
Health:

The YOS has access to the school nurse team for vulnerable young people.  Health screenings are available to any young person, and the nurse will complete assessments and support access to provision for health needs.    Nurses attend and contribute to Deter forums for active multi-agency management of some of the YOS most prolific or persistently offending young people.

The Youth Liaison and Diversion scheme in the black country provides a health professional to sit on Out Of Court disposal panels, to screen and assist health access for young people accessing that process.

We are working with public health on the development of a group work programme for parent which supports them to understand their child's online life and discuss this with their children.

Education:

Education services continue to fund a co-located ETE officer, whose focus is to support education provision for those of school age. Connexions personal advisers help young people who are not in education, employment or training to find a suitable place in post- 16 education, training and employment.   

The SEND agenda is important to all agencies, and the YOS continues to work more closely with the Inclusive Learning Team to improve the links of the YOS to this.  The Educational Psychologists have offered to deliver training to staff and we are exploring how our services can work effectively together, including better sharing of information and understanding trends.  

Connexions Sandwell currently has 2 Connexions personal advisers working across YOS and Leaving Care services for a large proportion of their time. 

The relationship with education staff and Connexions has contributed to the success in ETE engagement and provision for YOS cases, for which we are grateful.  There is a challenge with the current cohort to find meaningful ETE opportunities and we are exploring ways of improving our offer.

The YOS has developed much closer working relationships with the Sandwell Community Schools identifying a shared cohort, objectives and working together on projects like the Popular Opinions Leaders. 

Mental Health:
The YOS have a specific named Primary Mental Health worker funded by the CCG and provided by Kaleidoscope.  This person is co-located at the YOS and represents an excellent addition to the team, with a specific remit to focus on emotional well-being.   For CAMHS eligible mental health issues, the YOS has a general referral route to CAMHS.  
The Black Country Youth Justice Liaison and Diversion pilot continues to be in place.  In Sandwell we have developed a pathway which provides the opportunity of an assessment for those receiving a first community resolution, and a health representative on the weekly Out Of Court Disposal panels, which is added value to an already effective process.

Commissioning:

Following the re-modelling of the Sandwell School Nursing Service, there is a nurse specifically allocated to work with the Youth Offending Service who conducts holistic health assessments and develops health plans for those young people who need additional health support. Their work will now also include conducting health assessments for young people on Community Behaviour Orders.

Public Health also fund community-based targeted prevention programmes for children at risk of crime and anti-social behaviour (i.e. Teamworx). 

Fire Service:
The Fire Service deliver a range of prevention activities and interventions are available in both formal and informal educational settings.   The Fire Service contribute to the Youth Justice Partnership and will for example, be delivering Unconscious Bias training to Board members.

Prince's Trust:

The Prince's Trust are keen to be a partner in developing and evolving their own offer to young people as part of their plans for working in the Black Country.  We are using the arts programme and the concept of 'creative careers' as a way of working more closely together.

Youth Magistrates

We maintain strong links with the Magistrates and attend the regional forum to discuss issues and keep abreast of changes in either service. The Youth Magistrate lead attends and contributes to YOS board.

Voluntary sector:

The voluntary sector provide vital services across the borough which have direct or indirect links to reducing youth offending through the support the offer to young people.  We have a representative from the Sector (Sarah Ward, Women's Aid) on the youth justice partnership board and are keen to consider how our services align in the goal of helping young people lead happy, crime free lives.


West Midlands Combined Authority:

Sandwell is committed to working with the combined authority on key initiatives relating to youth justice reform and wishes to be involved with WMCA and the PCC's office in the development of the violence reduction units.


Finance: 2019/20 funding

Sandwell Youth Offending Service budget is made up of funding from the Youth Justice Board, Police Crime Commissioning, local authority and partner agency contributions.  Budget pressures are discussed at quarterly YOS Board meetings.  We note a small decrease in the YJB budget but accept the difficult national position on funding.

We are proud of the relationship we have developed with our police partners. We have a Youth Crime Officer located within our team and access to an early help team. Financial contribution for 2018/19: £ 

We have one seconded Probation Officer.  Financial contribution for 2018/19: TBC

2018/19 funding YOS £Sandwell Childrens Trust*344,600Youth Justice Grant482,410Police and Crime Commissioner - YOT and DECCA75,000Fees & Charges West Midlands Police 21,888National Probation Service5,000Unitas - Summer Arts College19,578Total Funding*948,476
*awaiting final confirmation

Please note the YOS received funding from the YJB Serious Youth Violence Grant.  This was not contained within the 18/19 plan as was launched later in the year.  The funding was used for the Arts Project.


Risks and Challenges:

Sandwell YOS is focusing on trying to respond to and engage with a smaller but complex and diverse cohort of young people.  The YOS is sincere in its desire to innovate and evolve, accepting that it is the YOS responsibility to make its service accessible and engaging to its cohort.

The partnership working in Sandwell is revitalised and there is a strong focus on governance, clarity of purpose and making a difference. 

Key strategic risks for 19/20 include:
- That changes to governance will not equate to clarity of reporting or impact.  We seek to mitigate this by retaining a focus on the governance, ensuring appropriate membership and the relation to the strategic work across the borough.
- That a 'good' inspection may lead to lack of action given pressures on other areas of service delivery.  We are confident that we have the appetite to build on the strengths highlighted in the HMIP report but also addresses the challenges.  Our continued focus on the HMIP action plan will drive these changes and maintain the energy.
- Management changes in the YOS; at the time of writing the report there are known changes to the Team Managers, who have been in role for some time.  This poses a consistency challenge for quality assurance but good recruitment and the use of the national standards self-assessment audits to understand our position and required actions will assist. 



Commitment in principle:

Signed:

Martin Hurcomb - Board Chair


Date:

Appendix 1: HMIP action plan
Recommendation/Issues Raised in ReportWhat will be done?Who will do it?Timetable for Completion:The Chair of the YOS Management Board should:
1. make sure that the Management Board is effective in setting the direction and strategy for the work of the YOS and improve its engagement with
frontline staff.

































The YOS Management Board should:

2. identify and minimise the impact of discrimination and disadvantage in the criminal justice system, especially for children and young people from a black and minority ethnic background.





































The YOS Manager should:
3. ensure that assessing and planning for work in out-of-court disposals are of a good quality and manage the risk of harm to others, address safety and wellbeing factors and meet the needs of the child or young person










































4. develop the YOS's victim and restorative justice processes to make certain that the needs of potential and actual victims and opportunities for restorative justice are fully considered and acted upon, in every relevant
case.
YOS Board Away day to reflect on the Inspection Report.


Revise Terms of Reference and Membership


Agree Governance and linkage/reporting to key boards




Review performance against current priorities.  Agree 2019/2020 priorities.

Explore Innovation - specifically use of ALTAR to inform practice and creative engagements.

Agree staff and young people engagement aims/processes for the Board.






Partners to scrutinise own data and bring back to meetings to highlight any points of concern/further exploration as well as good practice.





YOS board to explore as far as possible the full range of factors contributing to the disenfranchisement of young people and their involvement in youth crime.




Unconscious bias training for Board members and staff




Explore and help to create evidence base for creative engagement of BAME young people





Evaluate current provision to demonstrate impact of existing OOCD process on offending



Identify good practice nationally including implementing new screening tool for CRs and ensuring improved response in the case of YC/YCC or multiple orders.


Ensure improved management oversight from YOS and Police






Explore possibilities for additional resource for resilience.



Ensure rationale for decision making is clearly evidenced.


Ensure rationale for risk of harm and wellbeing is clearly evidenced.


Align Sandwell YOS victims/RJ response to regional best practice and PCC commissioned services.


Explore potential for additional resource and training to boost RJ offer.


Ensure victim's wishes are more adequately captured and responded to wherever possible, across intervention types.

YOS Board 




YOS Board



YOS Chair 






YOS Board members and SSP executive.


YOS Board members and SSP executive.


YOS Board Chair








YOS Board members










YOS Board members











YOS Board and YOS Manager



YOS manager








YOS Board








YOS Manager
Police
YCO 
YOS staff







OOCD YOS Team Manager and Police Sergeant



YOS Manager and YOS Board Chair


YCO and YOS Staff




YCO and YOS Staff




YOS Manager and RJ worker





YOS Chair and YOS manager



YOS Manager.
YOS Team Manager
RJ worker
YOS staffCompleted.





By first YOS board in 2019.



In line with overall review of governance being completed by DCS.



Review at each Board.





Progress to be monitored at YOS Board.  




First YOS Board in 2019









Agree expectations with Board members first board in 2019








This is an ambitious target which will stem from the ALTAR results and themes which emerge from partner's data.






By end of financial year.





Maintain as ongoing agenda item; monitor via Board.







To be discussed and commissioned at first YOS board in 2019




May 2019











Implement new screening tool by January 2019.






Implementation Jan 2019





By First YOS Board in 2019




Commenced.  Review as part of QA processes.


Commenced.  Review as part of QA processes.





Monitor via YOS board.





Feb 2019
Commenced.  Form more active part of QA processes from 2019.
Appendix B: Staffing



[IL0: UNCLASSIFIED]

[IL0: UNCLASSIFIED]
								Page 1

[IL0: UNCLASSIFIED]

