 
  














Contents
Glossary	2
1.	Introduction	4
2.	Structure and governance	4
3.	Resources and value for money	7
4.	Update on Slough YOT's achievements and priorities during 2018/19	10
5.	Slough YOT 2019/20 Priorities	12
6.	Evidence of Performance	13
7.	Safeguarding/Well Being	20
8.	Managing the risk of harm	21
9.	Workforce development	23
10.	Children and young peoples' voice	26
11.	Partnership arrangements	28
12.	Risks and priorities for action for youth justice outcome indicators	31
Appendix 1: YOT Management Board	32
Appendix 2: Slough YOT 2019/20 Priorities	32
Appendix 3 : Slough Youth Offending Team	34
Appendix 4 : Slough YOT Training	35



Glossary 

AIM			Assessment, Intervention, Moving On

AYSE			Assessed Supported Year in Employment 

AQA			Assessment and Qualifications Alliance

BAME			Black and Minority Ethnic

CAMHS		Children and Adolescent Mental Health Service

CBO			Criminal Behaviour Order

CL			Care Leaver

CLA			Children Looked After
  
CSE			Child Sexual Exploitation

CSP			Community Safety Partnership

ETE			Education, Training and Employment

FTE			First Time Entrants

HELP			Helping Everyone Live Positively

HMIP			HM Inspectorate of Probation 

JAC			Junior Attendance Centre

LA			Local Authority

LCJB			Local Criminal Justice Board

LPA			Local Police Area

LSCB			Local Safeguarding Children's Board

MASH			Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub

NS			National Standards

NEET			Not in Education, Employment or Training

NHS			National Health Service

OOCD			Out of Court Disposals

PEAR			Pupils Educationally at Risk

PCC			Police and Crime Commissioner 

PNC			Police National Computer

PRU			Pupil Referral Unit

RJ			Restorative Justice

RUI			Released Under Investigation

SALT			Speech and Language Therapy

SBC			Slough Borough Council

SCST			Slough Children's Services Trust

SEMRAC	Sexual Exploitation and Missing Risk Assessment Conference

SEND	Special Education Needs and Disability

SLCN			Speech, Language and Communication Needs

SSP			Safer Slough Partnership

STC			Secure Training Centre 

SYVF			Serious Youth Violence Forum

TVP			Thames Valley Police

TVLCJB			Thames Valley Local Criminal Justice Board 

YES			Youth Engagement Service

YISP			Youth Inclusion Support Programme

YJILS			Youth Justice Interactive Learning Space 

YJB			Youth Justice Board

YOI			Young Offenders Institution

YOT			Youth Offending Team
1.	Introduction

1.1	This updated Youth Justice Plan is produced in compliance with the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, Section 40 which stipulates the following:

It shall be the duty of each Local Authority (LA), after consultation with the relevant persons and bodies, to formulate and implement for each year a plan (a "youth justice plan") setting out:

a) How youth justice services in their area are to be provided and funded, and
b) How the Youth Offending Team (YOT) or Teams established by them, whether alone or jointly with one or more other local authorities, are to be composed and funded, how they are to operate, and what functions they are to carry out.

It should be noted that within Slough, children's services are delivered by Slough Children's Services Trust (SCST), since October 2015. 

1.2	The produced plan also incorporates guidance from the Youth Justice Board (YJB) and must be submitted to the Youth Justice Board for England and Wales and published in accordance with the directions of the Secretary of State.

2.	Structure and governance  

2.1	Slough YOT is part of the Safer Slough Partnership (SSP), attending regular meetings and contributing to solutions related to crime within the community. The focus over the year has continued to include violence, building on the local assessment of gangs that took place in February 2017 which the YOT contributed to. This work comes under the partnership priorities theme of Protecting People, encompassing young people and gang violence, modern slavery and criminal exploitation and child sexual and criminal exploitation. Work with the SSP overlaps that of the Local Safeguarding Children's Board, Local Criminal Justice Board (LCJB) etc.

2.2	Slough YOT continues to ensure that its work complements the work of partners wherever possible. This involves attendance at a range of meetings, under the umbrella of the Thames Valley Local Criminal Justice Board (TVLCJB). The purpose and vision is to reduce crime, harm and risk by increasing the efficiency, effectiveness and credibility of the Criminal Justice System, particularly by diverting children and young people from the criminal justice system. Slough YOT continues to work to targets identified in plans such as Slough Borough's Council's ( SBC) plan that has a priority that all children and young people will have the best start in life and opportunities to give them positive lives. Slough YOT's Youth Justice Plan also dovetails into the Slough Wellbeing Strategy, 2016-20, the priority of which is to protect vulnerable children. 

2.3	Within Slough, YOT Management Board membership remained stable until early 2019.  With the departure of the previous Health YOT Management Board member the position was taken on by the Head of Children, Young People's and Families on behalf of the National Health Service (NHS) for East Berkshire Commissioning Group.  The new Chief Executive for SCST joined Slough YOT Management Board in December 2018 and subsequently took on the chairing of the YOT Management Board June 2019.  Over the year attendance by YOT Management Board members has been looked at twice in an attempt to ensure consistent attendance so that the responsibilities of the YOT Management Board could be exercised.  The initial analysis resulted in a representative for Secondary Schools joining the YOT Management Board not just to support the YOT priorities but also to help on the various educational partnerships that already existed.  The vacant Head quarters Police membership was also covered quickly. 

2.4	Slough YOT Management Board members were also reminded of the need for consistent attendance and use of deputies in cases where they could not attend.   At the time of writing, membership was as outlined in Appendix 1 outlining the only statutory gap being in respect of educational LA representation, although a representative has been identified and invited to the next meeting. All the new YOT Management Board members have been inducted by the YOT Head of Service so that they are clear about their roles and responsibilities as a member of the YOT Management Board. These requirements are also on the top of the agenda for meetings, as a prompt.  With guidance from YOT Management Board members the induction pack, which includes the YOT Management Board Terms of Reference, has been updated and has been used as an exemplar by other Berkshire YOTs.

2.5	The YOT Management Board fulfils its duties in line with the Crime and Disorder Act requirements, performance, completion of national standard audits etc. Topics covered on the YOT Management Board agenda continue to not only enable the YOT Management Board to hold the YOT to account, in respect of its practice, but also to challenge each others partnerships and agree how partners can together support the agenda of youth crime, overcoming barriers to effective multi-agency working and also making an effective contribution to delivering against key youth justice outcomes. Slough YOT Management Board has a structured agenda which assists it in doing business. It also looks at joint work/support for those at risk of offending.  Over the year, and following a presentation from the YJB in respect of the role of the YOT Management Board members undertook shadowing.  Feedback from one YOT Management Board member observing court duty was:

"I think that the young people are very lucky to have you there to support them"

2.6	Areas considered by the YOT Management Board since July 2018 include YOT performance, finance/resourcing (always mindful of grant conditions and the crime and disorder partnership resourcing requirements), performance indicators, good practice/successes, resettlement, serious youth violence, Referral Orders (which highlighted the development need in respect of restorative justice and took on YOT Management Board findings from the in-house self assessment related to the Referral Order HM Inspectorate of Probation (HMIP ) report) etc. Education has been discussed at the YOT Management Board regularly over the last few years due to the YOT Management Board's recognition that it is a challenging area and recognition of the number of young people who are not in Education, Training and Employment who become involved in offending.  Positives/case studies which highlight the impact of work done with young people, e.g. undertaking and using  the attainment of a certificate to obtain funding, is also bought to the attention of the YOT Management Board.  Remands have also been looked at as well as parenting support and the profile of young people offending over January - March 2019 to assist in targeting of work by the YOT and partners along with a briefing on the revised National Standards (NS).  The YOT also undertook a self assessment, to support the pending Inspection. 

2.7	One of the strengths of the YOT Management Board is its requests for data to scrutinise and go on to challenge and change practice not just of the YOT but as a collective.  Examples of this can be seen in respect of work/cases studies around specific community groups accessing education, reoffending rates related to the YOT cohort, young people's progress on specific orders etc.  Slough YOT Management Board members and various partners continue to seek to support young people attaining education, employment, or training. Examples of this includes the education representative taking young people Not in Education, Employment or Training (NEET) to the Fair Access Panel on behalf of the YOT, the Virtual School increasing their support to support the current YOT Education, Training & Employment (ETE)  vacancy which is proving difficult to find an agency worker for.  It is positive that when the Education representative left the YOT Management Board, a replacement for him was quickly identified.

2.8	Slough YOT undertakes auditing and self assessments during the year to ensure that practice is effective and highlight development areas for staff.  Outcomes from these audits and self assessments have been the development of 'My Plan' to supplement the assessment tool used with children and young people and their parents, the recent recruitment of a Victim Liaison / Restorative Justice / Reparation Worker (to focus on and develop work around victims and how young people repair the harm they have done). In respect of the Victim Liaison / Restorative Justice / Reparation Worker, recruitment to this post was not only as a result of findings from YOT managers auditing that restorative justice was no longer being focused on but from staff highlighting at subsequent training commenting: "The training highlighted that RJ practice is not currently embedded within the service, I would like to use it with clients".  In addition resources have been produced with more of a victim perspective (e.g. the Victims Workbook and sessions within the serious youth violence programme) and volunteers are encouraged to use restorative training in Panel meetings.

2.9	The YOT Management Board set agenda covers Finance, Performance, Priorities, Prevention, Partner Updates, Report from the Head of Service, Risks to the work of the YOT, and the role of Slough YOT Management Board is clearly articulated on the top of the agenda as a focus during the meetings.  This role was reinforced via a presentation from the YJB in September 2018.  Each meeting also highlights example of the work of the YOT, to keep, members of the YOT Management Board up to speed (a process introduced by a previous Chair of the YOT Management Board).


2.10	During the coming year the YOT will continue to focus on a range of priorities related to preventing offending behaviour and taking into account a range of plans, such as the YJB strategic plan 2018-21, SSP Plan, Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs) Plan, Local Safeguarding Children's Board (LSCB) Plan and aims/objectives linked to various other partners and community groups. Relationships will also be maintained with a range of partners who support the criminal justice agenda such as, Housing, Liaison and Diversion etc. 

3.	Resources and value for money
AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Slough's Children Services Trust486,38736,500522,887Police Service54,01554,015National Probation Service9,1385,00014,138Health Service51,40851,408Police and Crime Commissioner66,11224,00090,112YJB Good Practice Grant207,00053,235260,235Other - Controlling Migration Fund42,00024,00066,000Total916,060142,7351,058,795



















TabTable 1: Partner contributions to the youth offending partnership consolidated/pooled budget 2019/20 

3.1	Slough YOT is well funded.   Partners' contribution levels have stayed more or less consistent.  The YJB funding level 2019/20 (Table 1) continues at a similar level to last year totaling £260,235 which includes funding for the Junior Attendance Centre (JAC) of £23,751 which ensures that the JAC is run in line with the Operational Procedures.  

3.2	It is anticipated that 2019/20 grant monies will continue to be spent in line with current  grant conditions, particularly focusing on the three national indicators, three local indicators, or programmes identified to support all the indicators and the current needs of young people. It will also be utilised to support work around the areas of prevention, re-offending, victims, Restorative Justice (RJ)/reparation, parenting,  substance misuse, serious youth violence, volunteers etc., thereby focusing on the intended purpose of 'delivery of youth justice services'. The bulk of this is around prevention hence Slough YOT will continue to run Youth Inclusion Support Programmes (YISPs) for young people between 10 years and 18 years, ensure that workers build positive working relationships with other professionals and also sustain future referrals via demonstrating continued confidence in positive outcomes that can be achieved from the programmes provided. 

3.3	The in house evaluation will continue to be used to gain feed back from clients particularly in respect of the effectiveness and development of programmes which 100% of young people rated as ok to excellent.  Where areas for development are highlighted this is addressed with the management team in order to look at possible solutions e.g. improving reparation which was also addressed with the YOT Management Board as a long term vacancy did not support development in this area.   

3.4	In respect of the funding, as stated this is used in line with the JAC Operational Procedures. Over the year a 10 week rolling programme was developed which included sessions such as Goals and Motivation for Change, Commercial Crime, Citizenship and Inclusion, Safety of self and others, Maintaining health, and Food and Diet etc.  A partnership with St Johns Ambulance was developed which delivered a 3 hour bespoke First Aid course for young people.  All young people completed the course and attained basic First Aid qualifications.  Over the year and in response to feedback from young people a Fitness Instructor (local) has become part of the programme.  This models pro-social behaviours, reinforcing the disciplines of self control (with boxercise classes) and team work.

3.5	The Probation Service continues to support Slough YOT with cash funding of £14,138 in place of a Probation secondee, a worker was recruited to cover this post.   With the retirement of the previous secondee Police Officer it is anticipated that a new secondee will start August 2019 following some proactive work by the Police.   

3.6	Following a review of services, Health Services were reduced from 1fte to 0.7fte. At the time of writing a vacancy (stemming 1 year) has existed in respect of the 0.6 Children and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) element which the National Health Service (NHS) is supporting with a worker 0.1fte per week.  Several attempts have been made to recruit a secondee to the current 0.6fte vacancy with no success to date.  Success in supplying the 0.1fte Health provision was successful and the worker has been in post since March 2019.   At the time of writing Slough YOT had under a year left of Speech & Language Therapist (SALT) provision from the Berkshire configuration group.  It is anticipated that this will be picked up by Health once the contract expires.

3.7	Funding from the PCC via SBC is expected to stay at the same level in 2019/20. Slough YOT will continue to use the funding obtained focusing on priorities outlined in the PCCs plan for the Thames Valley 2017 -21, which focuses on vulnerability, prevention and early intervention, reducing offending and serious organised crime.  This year Slough has identified an increase in young people involved in county lines, serious youth violence, gangs and other exploitation activities which increase their level of vulnerability. The funding has/will continue be used to support work with young people and families in this area, running a range of groups and one to one programmes as well as raising awareness in regards to this agenda and support reduction of the fear of crime amongst young people and the community.   

3.8	Over the year Slough YOT have focused on increasing the number of volunteers it works with. Although quite a few have been recruited during the year numbers have been dropping off for various reasons. Current numbers have decreased to 15 (Table 2). Volunteers have not only been involved with Panel meetings but supporting case managers with attending young people's activities, JAC and reparation projects. 

	Comments from volunteers in respect of their work with the YOT include:









Where the volunteer who was nominated for the Butler's Trust Award, and received an acknowledgement was concerned, comments from staff included:













3.9	

VolunteersEthnicityAsianBlackMixedWhiteTotalFemale511310Male40015Total911415      Table 2: Number of volunteers at YOT by gender and ethnicity type (June 2019)
      
4.	Update on Slough YOT's achievements and priorities during 2018/19 

4.1	Slough YOT saw improved performance in respect of its indicators over 2018/19 which is expanded in more depth within the performance section of the plan.  The performance for Slough YOT is split in respect of the National Indicators (re-offending, custody and first time entrants) and Local Indicators (accommodation, education, training and employment and black and minority ethnic children in the criminal justice system). Slough YOT continued to deliver services in line with the YJB grant conditions for Effective Practice, the JAC etc. 

4.2	The YOT Management Board has also looked at self assessments undertaken by the YOT related to the recommendations from the Disposal work in YOT Thematic Report (March 2018), Out of Court Disposals (OOCDs) etc. which has resulted in looking at gaps, raising awareness and improving practice.  A self assessment in respect of how the YOT Management Board supports the YOT and youth justice, aligned to inspection needs, was also undertaken with support from the YJB in September 2018 (which resulted in the YOT Management Board members undertaking some shadowing of YOT staff). 

4.3	Slough YOT continues to work to its vision of Helping Everyone Live Positively (HELP), working in a holistic manner, putting the child at the centre and encompassing the family. This dovetails into the Trust's vision to ensure children are Safe, Secure and Successful through systemic working.  Brown Community Services Rebuild Project was commissioned to provide parenting services to complement work undertaken with young people.  Feedback from parent's of young people, which demonstrates that parenting work assists in understanding and changing behavior, in a holistic/system manager, which supports preventing re-offending, is as follows:




"... Made me understand I can have support and I have opened up where normally I wouldn't do that.  I have accessed counselling which is helping with things I am struggling with.  Completed a CV to help me look for work and have received support in meetings"  

"[member of staff] has really supported me with my family and appointments, talking through appointments afterwards and putting in place support plans.  She helps me to contact relevant agencies .... and has helped support me in getting things done and devising strategies on how to go about getting these things done"

4.4	Commissioned and parenting support from YOT staff is evidenced via self referrals by parents.  In addition partners also refer cases and to support preventative work within the locality services joint work takes place with Family Support and the services of parenting is offered beyond statutory work in the aim of building resilience to prevent children and young people coming into the youth justice arena.

4.5	In respect of priorities from 2018/19, outlined in the annual Youth Justice Plan, the majority of these were all processed as anticipated.  It included monitoring Black And Minority Ethnic (BAME) young people within the criminal justice system, transitions between services particularly Social Care, Probation, Early Help and Health, supporting children who are looked after, have special educational needs etc., beginning to redevelop work in restorative justice and related to reparation projects, looked at not just remand to custody alternative (working closely with Social Care in respect of young people remanded into the care of social care) but also remand spend.  Throughout the year, and taking into account Slough's Special Educational Needs and Disability (SEND) Quality Mark staff continued to ensure that the special and diverse needs of children, and their parents/carers, were taken into account where programmes of change/work were concerned. 

4.6	The YOT has sufficient and appropriate accommodation for staff and for seeing children and young people.  

4.7	Slough YOT contributed to a successful bid application in relation to Early Help and prevention of serious youth violence. In addition to this the YOT is involved in partnership working and information sharing that takes into account the various data sharing legislation etc.  The output of which is that over the year there has again been no critical incidents in respect of young people the YOT has worked with.

4.8	With an increase of preventative referrals Slough YOT has developed its partnership working with not just Social Care but also Services for Youth and Early Help.   In respect of Early Help the YOT is part of the Early Help Strategy 2019 - 2021 focusing on the elements of safe, secure and successful children and young people and families.  YOT work around prevention and its Youth Inclusion Support Programme (YISP) is of importance here.   Relationships with community groups such as Aik Saath has been sustained which facilitates young people volunteering to work in the community once their intervention with the YOT has concluded.  In addition synergies around joint working are sought and where possible developed, e.g. the recent development of the YOT having a 0.5fte services for youth worker and support from a worker within the Virtual School.   

4.9	Slough YOT supports the Trust's Front Door, providing a social worker one day a week within the service and also sits on the Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH) strategic and operational Board, working collaboratively with MASH.   In respect of the YOT worker supporting the Front Door, this is a duty arrangement, implemented following a successful pilot last year. The worker supports social workers with new referrals and assessments and preventative pathways as well as when safeguarding thresholds are met.

4.10	Slough YOT seeks to recognise and celebrate partnership working and achievements of others.  Slough YOT made 4 nominations to the Butlers Award (which recognizes individuals for their levels of dedication, skill and creativity they bring to their work) in June 2018.  Of these one volunteer and two staff members received letters acknowledging the work they had done within the Youth Justice field.  A worker from the third sector - Aik Saath, nominated by the YOT, received a Butlers Award for his contributions.  Individually and collectively they clearly embraced the YOT Vision of Helping Everyone Live Positively and the Trust Visions and Values.

4.11	Slough YOT registered to participate in the Assessment & Qualification Alliance (AQA) Unit Awards Scheme April 2019 and is now a Centre that can process certificates for children and young people.  The aim is to support children and young people working with Slough YOT with this scheme while they are awaiting a return to mainstream or alternative provision.

4.12	In respect of the priorities Slough focused on for 2017/18 these were all completed and are interwoven into the body of the plan.  This can be seen in the commentary about work around violence and vulnerability, serious youth violence and county lines,   ensuring wellbeing in custody, changes related to the YJB (e.g. Children First focus), disproportionality, preventative work, increasing the use of restorative justice etc.   In regards to the serious youth violence programmes this has incorporated the real life story of a lifer (Life in 39 seconds) who committed a violent offence, and has subsequently sought to focus on how he can encourage others not to make the same mistake as himself, and also to give back to society, building a relationship and working with Slough YOT on some of his release days. Slough YOT also supported developments related to the criminal justice field where young people were concerned.  This included participating in the YJB commissioned evaluation of AssetPlus.

5.	Slough YOT 2019/20 Priorities 

5.1	The Priorities for Slough YOT in 2019/20 are outlined in Appendix 2.  These have been developed through consultation with Board members and take into account local profiling around the needs of young people within Slough.  

6.	Evidence of Performance

6.1	Slough YOT reports on its performance in two ways. It reports to the YOT Management Board on a local level about current cohorts, using in-house data and sources. The other reporting is by explaining its position when compared with the other Thames Valley YOTs, Family Comparison YOTs, the South East, and also nationally. The data for this latter report (National Indicators) is produced and published by the YJB and is broken down looking at the following:

* First Time Entrants (FTE) to the Police National Computer (PNC) rate per 100,000 of 10-17 age group population
* Use of custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 age group population 
* Re-offending rates after 12 months (focusing on approximately 18 months previous data)




Indicators       Q1Q2Q3Q4End of YearEnd of YearLocal2018-192018-192018-192018-19performanceperformancetargets(Apr-Jun)(Jul-Sep)(Oct-Dec)(Jan-Mar)2018-192017-182018/19       1Rate of proven re-offending by young offenders
NOTE: This is a measure time-delayed by 18 months20.0%0%0%40%12.9%32.9%25.8%(2 of 10)(0 of 6)(0 of 10)(2 of 5)(4 of 31)(27 of 82)or less2Young people within the Youth Justice System receiving a conviction in court who are sentenced to custody4.3%0%6.5%0%3.0%8.0%5.1% or less(1 of 23)(0 of 22)(2 of 31)(0 of 24)(3 of 100)(6 of 75)3First time entrants to the Youth Justice System aged 10-171772013575862EntrantsEntrantsEntrantsEntrantsEntrantsEntrantsEntrants4Young offenders engagement in suitable education, employment or training at end of their Order50.0%33.3%68.8%64.0%54.2%48.6%70%(12 of 24)(6 of 18)(11 of 16)(16 of 25)(45 of 83)(35 of 72)or more5Young offenders access to suitable accommodation100.0%94%94.1%96.2%96.3%91.9%95%(21 of 21)(17 of 18)(16 of 17)(25 of 26)(79 of 82)(68 of 74)or more6Ethnic composition of offenders on Youth Justice System disposals42.3%54.2%42.1%41.9%44.5%50.0%63% or less(11 of 26)(13 of 24)(16 of 38)(13 of 31)(53 of 119)(62 of 124)Table 3: Summary of 2018/19 Performance Indicators

6.2	Table 3 highlights Slough YOTs performance for 2018/19. It shows that Slough met all but one of six of the Local and National Performance Indicators, which was the young offender's engagement in suitable education, employment or training at the end of their order. The most significant improvement from the previous year was in the reduction of proven re-offending by young offenders which decreased from 32.9% in 2017/18 to 12.9% in 2018/19.

6.3	Rate of proven re-offending by young offenders: Slough YOT's end of year performance is 12.9%. In respect of re-offending since 2015, this has fluctuated over the years, as indicated in the following Chart 1 (in-house data), and is at its lowest in 2019. 

 
      Chart 1: Re-offending from 2015 - 2019

6.4	During 2018/19 there was a decrease, from  nine to eight young people who were remanded in custody, either in a Secure Training Centre (STC), Young Offenders Institution (YOI) or a custody status programme. All of the remands were for serious offences such as violence against the person, drug offences and possession of a weapon. In regards to average time spent on remand, this decreased from 80 days to 69 days.

6.5	Young people within the Youth Justice System receiving a conviction in court who are sentenced to custody: three young people received custodial sentences for offences including grievous bodily harm, possession of knife blade and theft.   This demonstrated that custody tended to be given for serious offences.



 	Chart 2: Custodial Sentences from 2015 to 2019
	
6.6	Chart 2 and Chart 3 show that the linear trend of custodial sentences fluctuated year on year, however 2018/19 saw a reduction by half from the previous year and is at its lowest rate since 2015. Despite the Slough YOT custody rate remaining higher than the south-east and regional rate, when compared with national figures the Slough YOT has out-performed at 0.18 the national rate of 0.30 for the first time in two years.  In respect of the use of custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 age group population (April 18 to March 19), Slough YOT's custody rate of 0.18 was considerably lower than national statistics, which was 0.31. 


 
Chart 3: Custody Rate per 1,000 Young People from 2015 to 2019

6.7	First Time Entrants (FTEs) to the Youth Justice System aged 10-17: Chart 4 shows that since 2015, FTE figures have been on a steady decline and are at the lowest over the last four years and below the target of 62 for the last two years. In 2018/19, numbers fell further to 57.  The outreach work in schools resumed and continued to create awareness of the law and divert young people from committing offences thereby supporting this indicator.

6.8	The YJB set resettlement of children from custody as a priority to ensure that children are given the very best chance of a positive future on release and do not reoffend.  Feedback to the YOT Management Board over the year highlighted that in partnership with Probation, Prisons, and Education etc. Slough YOT was able to ensure not just robust resettlement plans but also the safety of young people while in custody. For those who receive custodial sentences, case managers ensure that resettlement into the community is seamless via attendance at review meetings within custodial institutions and partnership working with relevant agencies which includes Probation etc. 


      Chart 4: First Time Entrants from 2015 to 2019

6.9	Chart 5 represents the rate of First Time Entrants as per 100,000. Despite remaining above the national average since 2015, Slough YOT's First Time Entrants rate has gradually decreased reflecting the rate of reduction presented nationally.


      Chart 5: First Time Entrants rate per 100, 000

6.10	Summary of 2018/19 Performance against YJB National Indicators: Slough's FTE rate of 332 per 100,000 of 10-17 age group population (January 18 to December 18) was above the national and YOT comparison groups; however there has been improvement from last years rate of 387. Regarding re-offending rates (April 17 to June 17), Slough's binary rate of 48.5% remained above the national average of 38.1%.  
	
6.11	Summary of 2017/18 Performance against YJB National Indicators: Slough's FTE rate of 387 per 100,000 of 10-17 age group population (January 17 to December 17) was above the national and YOT comparison groups; however there has been improvement from last years rate of 420. Regarding re-offending rates (July 15 to June 16), Slough's binary rate of 47.8% was slightly above the national average of 42%, but still below the London average of 47.9%. In respect of the use of custody rate per 1,000 of 10-17 age group population (April 17 to March 18), Slough YOT's custody rate of 0.45 was marginally higher than national statistics, which was 0.41. 

6.12	Local/diagnostic performance indicators: As previously mentioned, this relates to young peoples' engagement in suitable education, employment or training, BAME within the criminal justice system, and accommodation status of young people the YOT works with.  Despite a range of challenges, with the support of YOT Management Board members Slough YOT has been actively addressing and tackling the issue of young people who are NEET over the year with varied success. This has contributed to an improved outturn; however the YOT believes greater improvements will have a positive impact on the reduction of offending behavior, in line with research in this area, and the agreed recruitment of an agency ETE worker for 6 months will support this work.  

6.13	Slough YOT is an active member of the LSCB Education Subgroup which has helped to support improvement in this area, and also attends the Pupils Educationally at Risk (PEAR) panel on a monthly basis to focus on children at risk and/or those who are not receiving the education they should. Slough YOT has built an enhanced working relationship with the local Pupil Referral Unit (PRU), Haybrook, attending the PRU weekly to support the more complex needs of young people. Slough YOT has also been successful in re-establishing working relations with Services for Youth by attending bi-monthly meetings, increasing referrals to Services for Youth during the interventions with young people and trialing joint working until the end of March 2019. To support transitions and ensure continuity, exit strategies are utilised. These also include referrals to Autism Berkshire (for those diagnosed with autism where support is needed for young people and parents), encouragement to make contact with the online counselling resource supporting well-being referrals to KOOTH, Daisy's Dream etc. 

6.14	The proportion of young offenders who are BAME decreased during 2018/19, from 50% of offenders to 45%, which is still below the target of 63% (2011 CENSUS). At the time of writing, there were no concerns related to disproportionality, as highlighted in the Lammy Review (September 2017) looking at the treatment of, and outcomes for, BAME individuals within the criminal justice system. Although no concerns from the Lammy Review were apparent, what has been noted since March 2018 is an increase in Roma young people coming into the criminal justice system who are NEET. Partnership work is thus on-going, and will continue, to address this matter.  

6.15	Over 2018/19 the outturn in respect of young people in suitable accommodation when they ended their statutory interventions with the YOT was 96.3%.  Success in this area has been down to a range of partnership working with Social Care and housing and also work around parenting utilizing YOT staff expertise and a commissioned service who in the absence of a YOT worker are able to commit 24/7 services to parents.   Slough YOT is also involved in a partnership project with Housing related to housing provision for homeless 16 - 25 year olds Children Looked After (CLA) within Slough.

6.16	During 2018/19, violence against the person and motoring offences have been the most common offences with a slight drop in theft offences as the third most common offence, followed by drug offences.   Drug offences have continued to increase and targeted work is still being carried out alongside these young people with groups and universal sessions this year.  In respect of the drug offences with intent to supply, each young person is referred to a specialist focusing on such offending and work in this area is tied into the serious youth violence work/agenda of the PCC.

7.	Safeguarding/Well Being

7.1	Young people within Slough continue to come to the notice of all agencies in respect of exploitation, particularly related to organized crime and the movement of drugs.  Hence this continues to be a priority to work on jointly seeking ways to ensure that the well being of young people are taken into account balancing this with the safeguarding/protection of the public.  This priority is supported via attendance at the SEMRAC, along with completing a CSE indicator tool when making referrals, the sharing of information with the MASH in order to identify the correct services and who needs to be involved with individuals etc. in order to safeguard. Partnership working in these areas has enabled timely, relevant and appropriate responses/work by the right individuals/services. Slough YOT continues to be part of a range of meetings/forums as indicated (including Child Protection meetings) and shares information, in line with legislation.
7.2	Slough YOT's Head of Service is Deputy Chair of the local Channel Panel and has participated in training which supports the Governments Prevent Strategy aimed at stopping people supporting or being drawn into terrorism who have vulnerabilities that can be exploited.  New staff also undertake trauma training in collaboration with Thames Valley YOTs and the London Inset Training programme; This training focuses on development, attachment, emotional and mental health in youth justice to support this area of work and that of youth violence. 

7.3	Discussions on safeguarding continue to take place within a range of meetings within the YOT and safeguarding remains a standard agenda item at Team Meetings, Senior Management Meetings, and supervision and appraisal sessions with staff. All YOT staff are aware of how any safeguarding issues can be escalated, and have utilized the Child of Concern process as required.

7.4	In contrast to the previous year there has been an increase in young people focusing on repairing the harm they have done to victims and undertaking both direct and indirect reparation.  This work needs to be developed further and consolidated.  It is anticipated that the recent recruitment of a Victims and Restorative Justice Worker will enable this to occur.  At the time of writing examples of developments were in the production of a victims booklet to use with young people and an increase of reparation placements which still included Aik Saath and local community centres but also Stoke Poges Memorial Gardens, with Active Slough, Scope Charity Store, Heathrow Special Needs Centre and Colnbrook Wildlife Heritage Trust.  There was also emerging evidence, during file reads, of staff undertaking restorative work with young people and their families as a result of family breakdown/conflict.  Since January 2019 Slough YOT has had an agency Victim and Reparation Worker focusing on developing both victim and restorative justice work.  This worker has begun to develop this area and it is anticipated that development will be maintained and built on with the start of a substantive worker for this role since July 2019.

7.5	Slough YOT not only acknowledges research and protocols around Reducing criminalization of Looked After Children (2015), it is aware of the risk that young people in children's homes are vulnerable to being groomed, exploited and 'bought' into activities that put them at risk, and is also conscious of the movement of drugs that involves violence.  Hence sessions around safety planning and risk identification was delivered to young people within the local Children's Home.  Awareness rising, which incorporated options for young people and their parents/carers and pathways was also delivered to foster carers and the local hospital. 

7.6	Safeguarding issues have been identified at some YOIs where Slough young people have been placed.  However there have been no safeguarding issues identified in respect of these young people. Over the year there was an increase in young people receiving custodial sentences due to the seriousness of their offences.  Hence Slough YOT undertook a custodial analysis.  The few development areas highlighted were addressed as a YOT to ensure practice with young people within custodial establishments was as robust as possible.  Due to an increase in incidents within one of the YOIs Slough YOT also ensured that Slough young people were not involved and reported back to the YOT Management Board.

7.7	Although the number of young people in custody over the year has not been high their well being while in custody has been monitored.  This has been particularly important when there have been incidents in the custodial establishments that have come to the media.  Fortunately feed back to the YOT Management Board over the year was that there were no concerns.

8.	Managing the risk of harm 

8.1	There is a clear overlap between safeguarding/vulnerability and violence. This is recognised by the YOT hence work in line with the Safer Slough Partnership Serious Violent Strategy (produced December 2018) took place, and is combined with the requirements related to the PCC grant the YOT receives.  Therefore over the year Slough YOT and partners have worked collaboratively on this issue.  Examples of such include:

* Continuing to run its youth violence programme, which incorporates weapons, substance misuse, safety, relationships, use of social media,  etc. which educate/raise awareness, support and guide children and young people advocating stopping such offending
* Participating in the TVP operations related to county lines 

8.2	Slough YOT holds a Risk Management Panel which is multi-agency and focuses on young people at risk of harm, and safety and wellbeing (particularly Children Looked After). At this panel, colleagues check that plans are robust enough and suggest elements that can support the young people and their families. Cases where custody is a potential are also considered as are cases where a Criminal Behaviour Order (CBO) is desired, along with cases where young people are believed to be involved in 'county lines' (moving drugs). To support the objectives of practice development within Slough YOT, elements of the signs of safety model supports risk management at this Panel.

8.3	Due to the holistic/systemic approach of the YOT, partnership working is one of its constants.  Over the year partners worked with supporting young people, their families and prevention of offending include the Police, members of the Community Safety Partnership (CSP), Probation, and Schools etc. with the importance of school involvement being reflected with additional school membership on the YOT Management Board.  Partnership working also includes involvement with Police operations (2 over the year) aimed at the supply of class A drugs and child criminal exploitation.  This facility is a more coordinated approach to targeting and working on behaviours that relate to serious youth violence.

 8.4	The work Slough YOT, and partners, participate in regarding serious youth violence varies although over the year it can be evidenced to be related to the movement of drugs and organised crime.  This work although embedded can and does have different focuses such as looking at how joint work with schools can result in desistence in this area, as does involvement with positive activities and family resilience (via parenting programmes such as Rebuild).  Continued involvement in the Serious Youth Violence Forum (SYVF) meetings which focuses on young people involved in 'gangs' and partnership working will also assist in this area along with the focus of the SSP on violent offences.  Programmes focused on this area have included discussions/reflections on safety, victims, carrying weapons, education/employment/training, sentences, drugs, impacts on family/self/others, consequences, dangers, ideologies positive activities, safety plans etc.

8.5	The use of various strategies to address serious youth violence/running drugs has involved the increase use of CBOs.  To ensure that these Orders are impactful yet appropriate Slough YOT is working with TVP in respect of revised guidance.  The aim is that the guidance will also be in line with guidance from the YJB which underlines fairness and equality while promoting credible and realistic prohibitions and conditions to enable young people to avoid committing anti-social acts. The courts are also in favour of this course of action as is articulated at forums such as the YOT Management Board. 

8.6	In support of the Prevent Duty Guidance, recently revised, the Head of Service attends and works in line with the Prevent meetings/strategy which includes sitting on the Channel Panel (which she is currently Deputy Chair for).  The YOT has also contributed to the Counter Terrorism Plan to support individuals who are vulnerable to be targeted in respect of terrorist activities.  At the time of writing no young people on the YOT caseload had been convicted of an extremism related offence.  Slough YOT also utilizes information from attendance such as the County Lines Conference (multi agency) to share and develop good practice.

9.	Workforce development

9.1	Following the profiling of risk and need for Slough YOT in 2016 (taking account of the reduction of workload nationally), its subsequent restructuring to meet that need, and recruitment of staff for the new structure, this continued May 2017 to the time of writing (Appendix 3). 

9.2	With the challenges in staffing over the year, with a range of vacancies particularly in the specialist areas, staff have developed specialist leads.  Examples of these include parenting, which took a systemic approach, involved both group and one to one work and covered topics such as child exploitation, challenging behavior, communication and reframing etc. Parenting workshops were also opened out to other services, such as Front Door (SCSTrust) and Early Help (SBC), thus promoting partnership working.

9.3	Slough YOT has offered a comprehensive training programme over the last 12 months.   Full details can be found in Appendix 4.

9.4      Being a trained Peer Reviewer the Head of Service has participated in a Peer Review this year supporting development and building on practice. The Operational Manager has also undertaken Inspection training and been part of an initial inspection.  Both the Peer Review and Inspection processed have enabled the sharing of two way effective practice and knowledge 
 
9.5	Various developments around practice have taken place over the year.  A new process for screening children and young people in respect of substance misuse was set up, the offer of drug workshops increased, and drug work books developed and circulated to staff to work with young people.  Feedback from young people in respect of this work included:

"Yeah now you say it I have been smoking so often that if feels abnormal when I'm not stoned.  It is something I'd like to change and I am up for looking at ways to cut back" (17) 

9.6	Training also took place in respect of volunteers and staff in respect of restorative justice and to improve practice at Panel Meetings.  The overall feedback was that the training was "informative ".  Following the training, observations by management at Referral Order panels indicated that the training received was being put into practice. An example of this includes panel members taking the young persons needs into consideration (such as if they had SEND) when deciding their reparation hours and also asking for letter of apologies to be written when the victim is known. Unfortunately, due to the lack of identified victims received by the YOT it remains hard to fully implement all aspects of RJ as we do not have victims attending panels. This issue is being worked with alongside TVP and is not just unique to Slough YOT.
 There continued to be a focus within the YOT in respect of developing practice which is seen with the YOTs involvement in the AssetPlus evaluation (January 2019).

9.7	Slough YOT continues to run Practice Forums which give staff an opportunity to not just train together but to also learn from each other and recognize and appreciate each others specialisms, skills and talents.  Over the year areas covered have included plans, risk management, inclusion of parent's interventions, and use of Genograms/Ecomaps, Adverse Childhood Experiences and Safety and Wellbeing.  Staff continue to be supported to maintain their case files by way of weekly admin morning and monthly Risk Panels, Team Meetings, informal multi-professional discussions, reflective conversations and challenging conversations also assist.

9.8	Staffing within Slough YOT is in line with the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 which continues to demonstrate a contribution to the year on year reduction of youth crime nationally. In regards to statutory partner contributions via secondments, in line with the Crime and Disorder Act, this now only occurs with the Police, and in part Health. Probation has been unable to second due to staffing pressures. They thus currently fund 0.5 staff as their contribution. Health have reduced their contribution to 0.3 fte per week CAMHS worker (although they have only been able to source 1fte, since January 2019, due to recruitment difficulties) and 0.5 Health provision.  Specialists continue to be part of the team make-up to ensure that a holistic service is provided and to meet emerging/identified challenges such as serious youth violence.

9.9	The staffing make-up for Slough YOT is outlined in Table 4 with Table 5 highlighting ethnicity and gender background and incorporating volunteers. There were no staff diversity concerns over the year in respect of BME as the ethic breakdown was 50% BME and 36% White (with a 14% vacancy factor) which is not too different from the CENSUS breakdown of 63% BME and 37% White.  Cases are allocated to staff utilising Slough YOT Allocation Procedure with the YOT working with both statutory and preventative cases with an average split of 80% statutory and 20% preventative.  Although the number of referrals for preventative work has remained constant, screening has resulted in some cases being re-directed to partners more suited to address the presenting issues.  Work continues to be undertaken with partners in highlighting what preventative cases can be sent to the YOT via attendance at meetings, presentations etc. Over the coming year it is anticipated that an analysis of the impact of the preventative work will take place.   Statutory cases continue to be higher than preventative cases. With both statutory and preventative cases elements linked to 'county lines' (where young people chose to or are coerced to move drugs around the country) is evident.   

9.10	A staff survey was completed within the YOT in May 2019, focusing on Work Health Check and Bench Marking. 60% of the team agreed that they had a good work / life balance.


Type of Contract Strategic Manager (PT)Strategic Manager (FT)Operational Manager (PT)Operational Manager (FT)Practitioners (PT)Practitioners (FT)Administration (PT)Administration (FT)SessionalStudents/TraineesTotalPermanent113453522Fixed-term11Vacant1427Agency22Secondee Probation0Secondee Police0Secondee Health (Mental Health & Health)22Secondee Health         (Speech & Language)11Total011412903535

















      T
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      T             Table 4: Number of staff at YOT by contract type (June 2019)
      
StaffEthnicityAsianBlackMixedWhiteVacancyTotalFemale12721334Male40059Vacancies77Total167218750      Table 5: Number of staff at YOT by gender and ethnicity type (June 2019)
      
9.11	During the Team Away Day 2018 staff made commitments and strove to achieve outcomes around practice development and performance.  This included delivering SALT training/supporting children and young people where a SALT need was identified, ensuring there was a mental health input, maintaining programmes around youth violence, setting up an education panel, using trend analysis to target work, developing new reparation provision etc.  All of these were achieved.  The Team Away Day 2019 thus focused on how these achievements could be maintained with staff juggling tasks while maintaining standards and working together effectively.  Team plans to do this include maintaining the focus of the 'child at the centre', continuing to work in a holistic/systemic manner with not just partners but also families, finding ways to demonstrate their commitment to the work they do,  continue to focus on ETE, highlight the need to maintain financially viable to meet the needs of young people who have a range of challenges and tend to be the last young people to be considered, continue to involve young people in the work of the YOT, celebrate the positive work Slough YOT by way of an Engagement Day in April 2020. 

10.	Children and young peoples' voice

10.1	An example of listening to young people is in regards to the worker undertaking a self assessment with her young person who indicated that the help she wanted from the YOT was in respect of "getting a job and career, housing, dressing smart, and motivation".  Due the multi-factor of this a Princes Trust programme was chosen.  The outcome and impact for the young person was  not only did she finish the  course advising that it 'improved her routine and reliability but also communication and team work' but course leaders noted her confidence and ability to work hard.   

10.2	The voice of the child and young person is integral to the work of the YOT, and its partners, to show progress.  This can be seen with partners such as the Virtual School where a young person told their social worker that they wanted to do a trade on release from prison and 2 options were found and discussed with him, an application made and a place secured within a week.  Impact is monitored not just within records but also programmes undertaken. In respect of this, evaluations are produced on a quarterly basis and staff are encouraged to seek feed back from young people, in order to assess impact and also identify good practice, practice that needs developing or changes in interventions. Feedback over the year has included changing the activities at the JAC (from the gym to a fitness instructor) and breaking up the session as a compromise of meeting the courts requirements but also the needs of those who struggle with engaging/focusing for long periods, linking young people up with Active Slough in respect of football coaching (reparation) where they are taught coaching skills which they then cascade into the community thus supporting non offending.

10.3	Summer 2018 Slough's Community Safety Team and Young People's Service worked with Slough Police in respect of a survey on crime and disorder related to young people.  Following a discussion at Safer Slough Partnership Young people involved in youth violence, working with the YOT, were included in the interviews.  Their contributions formed part of the bid that resulted in the current funding/initiatives of the related to serious youth violence - a collaborative programme currently being delivered within Slough.

10.4	Slough YOT receives direct feedback from young people via feedback forms.  An analysis of these forms in June 2019 indicated that 100% of the service users were of the opinion that individual services were good or excellent.  This was underlined by direct feedback from a young people at the end of their intervention with the YOT.   This figure for Slough YOT is also higher than findings from the HMIP's e-Survey (communicated November 2018) which indicated that 95% of the services reported nationally were good. The use of the services of the SALT worker has made communications with young people and their parents easier by refining documentation so that it takes more account of speech and language.  Examples of such relate to the evaluation forms young people are asked to complete, programmes produced and leaflets such as information around out of court disposals, the journey of the child within the criminal justice system, the Referral Panel Process and CBOs.  Due to the fact that the two other YOTs in East Berkshire have the same worker developed tools and resources result in a consistent approach across the area and synergies in respect of developing work and learning from and with each other in a collaborative manner.

Feedback from young people on services/support received included the following additional comments:





















10.5	There is an embedded process within the YOT of evaluating work by specialists and staff.  This enables staff to identify practice strengths as well as practice gaps, based on feed their assessments, observations and feedback from service users.  This has led to changes within the services of length of programmes, activities used to supplement work books, purchase of particular resources etc.  	Being part of the Autism Community Engagement Network enables the YOT to ensure that the voice of the child is heard by ensuring special educational needs and disabilities are met. Support for this agenda also occurs via the Liaison and Diversion programme which supports young people coming onto the criminal justice pathway by ensuring that they have the right services which have positive impacts that result in outcomes to prevent offending. The programme works by assessing needs, identifying partners to support the needs and where necessary fast tracking the provision of these services. The process is carried out in conjunction with the YOT. The foundation for working with children and young people in the criminal justice field is communication and the following comment from a young person highlights that this is the case at Slough YOT - "Workers listen to me".

11.	Partnership arrangements 

11.1	In recognition of the value of being involved in early prevention Slough YOT has consolidated the 3 month pilot of a YOT worker being located within the Social Care 'Front Door', as previously mentioned.  This 1 day per week duty arrangement continues to focus on giving advice and guidance related to 'triaging' referrals made where safeguarding is a possibility. This initiative strengthens the working relationships with Social Care staff and thus supports effective practice particularly with the Leaving Care Team and care support of children looked after in custody.   Services from Community and Leisure have also been commissioned and is being trialed in respect of a more seamless approach to working preventatively.  

11.2	Preventative work undertaken within Slough YOT is very much about supporting young people to build on protective factors, and explore and build on periods of desistance.  This may include exploring positive activities, building on support networks in a young persons life, exploring any education barriers, accessing support to manage mental health challenges, or managing risk that could potentially escalate etc.  Exit strategies are used, and involve building professional relationships with other agencies in Slough and working in collaboration so that the young person continues to get support after YOT involvement. 

11.3	Slough YOT works with the Virtual School in support of children and young people who are have an open intervention with the YOT and are also Looked After and Care Leavers.  Work in respect of these young people have included advocating on behalf of children and young people missing education within and outside of Slough with the outcome of getting young people back into education.  The YOT is also part of the Virtual School Governing Body and thus contributes to priorities to support 'joint children'.  Via the Virtual school, access for young people to numeracy and literacy support that help improve their skills is still set up. Work to enable Children Looked After (CLA) and Care Leavers (CLs) takes place via a range of ways, including the YOT being part of the Education, Employment and Training (EET) Delivery Group, for Looked after Children and those Leaving Care (2017 - 2019) which is a SBC and SCST collaboration.  This strategy, and work related to it, aims to ensure that this cohort, of whom young people Slough YOT work with are also included, is clear about what they can expect in respect of education, training and employment, how they are supported in this area in order to achieve their full potential and develop into independent self confident adults. There are plans to develop the Virtual School so that it supports more children than those who are in care/care leavers. It is anticipated that this will be of benefit to the work the YOT does with those who offend.


11.4	Late 2018 the Court Service for Slough young people was relocated to Reading.  Although the Court had to stop the court users meetings it used to run, Slough YOT endeavours to continue to have a line of communication to the Courts to communicate developments or work on developments via the Legal Advisor or Magistrates representative sitting on the YOT Management Board.  Following discussions at the YOT Management Board regarding the HMIP Referral Order recommendations, Slough YOT now sends newsletters to the Courts for magistrates to be aware of outcomes of Referral Orders made on Slough young people and the services Slough YOT delivers.  The YOT is also part of a forum, mainly consisting of colleague YOT staff, which looks at the delivery of court services in Reading.  It continues to be part of the Saturday Court Rota.  In respect of providing a service to the courts comments from magistrates include:  "useful recent update on the person", "thorough and detailed report"   In addition congruence rate for the court taking up recommendations from Slough YOT in respect of report proposals is 91%.

11.5	The YOT undertakes work related to Priority 1 of Slough's Wellbeing Strategy 2016 - 2020, which relates to protecting vulnerable children,  around protecting vulnerable children especially around child exploitation, PREVENT, ETE if Looked After etc.  It is part of Slough's Troubled Families Steering Group and works closely with the Police in respect of FTE's (promoting OOCD's such as community resolutions, youth cautions and youth restorative disposals), work around individuals being released under investigation or at risk of receiving a Criminal Behaviour Order etc.  Slough YOT also took participated in the YJB resettlement review in September 2018.  The YOT is also part of the Young People Accommodation and Support project group which is a partnership group focusing on the accommodation needs of children looked after and developing new pathways and provision.

11.6	Slough YOT uses analysis of information around offending to influence and work with partners to set up initiatives, make changes etc.  Examples of such include:

* Concerns around young people being released under investigation resulting in the Police setting up a Scrutiny Panel for Pre Charge Bail and Released Under Investigation (RUI) which seeks to ensure RUI is delivered appropriately, resolving court issues (involvement in Berkshire Defense Engagement Meeting involving Bench Chairs. Judges, Legal Advisors etc.).

11.7	In line with the Crime and Disorder Act partnership arrangements with the National Probation Service, Health Services, Thames Valley Police, the Local Authority/Trust etc. exist.  In addition the YOT has a range of partnership arrangements (and agreements) with third party sectors, education establishments, Courts, Services for Youth etc. In respect of working with the Courts Slough YOT supported the Magistrates' Court Mock Trial Competition (2019), and by default young people from Slough who want to contribute positively to the community.   Slough YOT is also part of a Youth Court User Group looking at how services to courts can be delivered especially following the move of the youth court that Slough supported from Maidenhead to Reading.

11.8	In conjunction with Bracknell Forest and the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead YOTs, and via the National Health Service (NHS) East Berkshire, Slough YOT speech, language and communication therapy resource one day per week continues to be part of the YOT.  The worker assesses young people's speech, language and communication needs providing direct targeted intervention and also up-skills the YOT staff in respect of recognising and supporting speech, language and communication needs (SLCN). Over the year the number of young people seen by the worker has increased with the cost common presenting problems being social communication needs and special educational needs being high on agenda. Staff have been trained by the SALT worker and resources have been updated to assist the understanding by children and young people of interventions and work with the YOT.  The work of the SALT worker is linked to the Children and Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) Transformation Plan in East Berkshire, East Berkshire SEND Service development and the Prison Reform Report 'In Care out of Trouble'.

11.9	Slough YOT embedded its strategic work around SEND over the year participating in the local area SEND Data Strategy meeting (and assisting with the development of a strategy), seeking to coordinate the work of the wide range of partners and stakeholders in meeting the needs and improving life chances of children and young people with SEND.  This can be seen with the SEND team within Slough with whom Slough YOT has an established process that ensures that young people convicted or remanded to custody continue to receive a service from Slough around their educational needs and any assessed and identified special educational needs.

11.10	To enrich the work within Slough the YOT also affords itself of various partnerships which are within Slough and outside of Slough.  One of these is with the High Sheriff of the Royal County of Berkshire (which enables close working with partners in the justice field and charities in Berkshire).

11.11	One of the positives of partnership working is the opportunity to make changes when development needs are recognised.  Such has been the case with recognition of the impact of the change of bail legislation on the criminal justice system, victims and young people.  Feedback from young people and partners, analysis of data related to how many young people were released under investigation and bringing discussing this in a range of venues resulted in the establishment of a scrutiny panel to look at how the process could be developed/improved.

11.12	Slough YOT remains part of Youth Engagement Slough (YES) Consortium which encourages healthy lifestyles for children and young people and fosters community safety and cohesion, supports Early Help and contributes to the NEET and youth voice agenda. YES also enables liaison and access to community associations which support children and young people such as the Youth Café, volunteering etc.  Connected to the work with YES the YOT works closely with Aik Saath (which supports the YOT with a number of reparation hours with several young people) and has encouraged young people to volunteer for the YOT. Referrals are also made to Aik Saath and YES as exit strategies to support progress of young people when they end their intervention with the YOT. Daisy's Dream (therapeutic support for bereavements), Youth Talk (therapeutic support), Services for Young People, Autism Berkshire, Social Care etc. are among the agencies young people are referred to as part of their exit strategies, along with the afore mentioned two. 

11.13	Work with Brunel University continued with one student completing his placement with the YOT attaining an ASYE (Assessed Supported Year in Employment) within the Social Care Department within the Trust.  Feedback from Brunel was 

"Your supervision and other aid have enabled our students to develop the necessary skills and knowledge to progress through their degrees and graduate".  

In addition to supporting Social Care students support was also given to students undertaking qualifications in Education and other discipline.

12.	Risks and priorities for action for youth justice outcome indicators

12.1	At the time of writing risks related to delivery of performance indicators were:

* Complete recording of all YOT work undertaken not fully evidenced in case records, which may lead to drift or duplication.  
o Action: Conclude the audit of all open YOT cases and develop and implement an improvement plan that addresses all identified areas for improvement.
* Gaps in evidence in relation to updating and sharing of assessments and plans may undermine the effective interagency working and act to reduce impact of partnership support. 
o  Action: Improve the quality of practice in relation to the quality, recording and timeliness of assessments, plans and reviews within the YOT.
* The proportion of children and young people not in education, employment or training is still relatively high. 
o  Action: Increase the proportion of children and young people in full time education.














Appendix 1: YOT Management Board


Appendix 2: Slough YOT 2019/20 Priorities 

	Over 2019/2020 it is anticipated that the following will be focused on, using a partnership approach

1Raise awareness and applaud/celebrate the achievements of Slough YOT over the last 20 years and the reduction of offending over that time period2Run an Engagement Day which involves partners3Secure Local Authority Education membership on the YOT Management Board and introduce a more thematic approach to meetings4Work related to balancing the wellbeing of children and young people who are criminally exploited with the safeguarding/protection needs of the public5Develop partnership working around youth violence6Ensure that the priorities identified thorough the audit of YOT cases are embedded in a YOT improvement plan that sets SMART targets around each area for improvement7Consider the work undertaken with girls8Deliver holistic/systemic work with young people that takes into account parenting9Consider how the preventative element of the YOT will be met10Plan for the HMIP Inspection while ensuring business as usual is maintained11Continue to work on improving ETE for children and young people having it as a YOT Management Board Meeting Theme12Continue to monitor and address as appropriate any increase of BAME young people who are remanded or receive custodial sentences13Monitor and address as appropriate any pattern of offending by particular cohorts of young people14Build on the recent developments in respect of restorative justice practice,  reparation and victims work 15Undertake at least two self assessments in line with the Youth Justice Board (YJB) Grant Conditions including one around NS.16Recruit to any outstanding staffing vacancies particularly those related to the requirements of the Crime and Disorder Act17Oversee the transformation programme in respect of the YOT to ensure continued effective delivery of the service for young people18Work with partners in respect of agency changes that could adversely impact on the Youth Justice priorities (e.g. Police and release under investigation and criminal behavior orders)19Work with TVP, the PCC, and various partners in respect of the serious youth violence unit if the bid is successful20In conjunction with the YJB and partners look at how funding is maintained, in respective areas, in order to maintain the criminal justice services of the YOT in line with the Crime and Disorder Act 1989



Appendix 3 : Slough Youth Offending Team
























Appendix 4 : Slough YOT Training 

Due to the amount of new staff, linked to the 2017 structure, a lot of basic, as well as specialist training took place over 2018.  These were linked to the following:

Recruitment and retention including undertaking inductions, Probation reports appraisals, supervision
Domestic Abuse 
AssetPlus
Restorative Justice 
Speech and Language/ Zones of Regulation
Systemic Working 
Hydra (related to radicalization)
Practice Educator (having social work students) 
Thresholds (related to child protection) 
Dignity at work
Risk and social media, cyber awareness (being safe on the internet)
Bereavement
 
Training via the Inset London YOT training consortium (that Slough YOT continues to be part of) equips staff in respect of specialist criminal behaviour training which includes 

Desistance/Good Lives/Pathways and Planning
Quality Assurance 
Effective Management Oversight
Unconscious bias
Managing risk
Assessment Intervention Moving on (AIM) for young people who commit sexual offences 

All staff can also access training from the Youth Justice Interactive Learning Space (YJILS), the Trust Training Directory, Community Care Inform and training identified in the YOTs training strategy (2018 - 2020). The training strategy aims to support consistency of practice as well as equip staff in regards to knowledge and skills linked to effective practice and performance in an area that is multi professional/multi-agency as well as forever changing. 





 
2
Slough Children's Services Trust | Slough Youth Justice Plan 2019/20 | SLR | July 2019

1


1


