                                               







Sefton Youth Offending Team

YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN

2019 - 2020









Contents								    Page



1. Introduction to Youth Justice Plan					3

2. Sefton's Vision							5

3. Review of 2018 Performance					7

4. Structure and Governance						13

5. Resources and Value for money					18

6. Partnerships								19

7. Risks and Opportunities to Future 

Delivery to the Youth Justice Outcomes				23

8. Service User Feedback						24

9. Priorities 2019 / 20							27

10. Plan Authorisation and Signatories				30

11. Appendices								31 

> Appendix 1 - YOT Management Board TOR		32

> Appendix 2 - Sefton YOT Structure				35

> Appendix 3 - Governance and Links			36

> Appendix 4 - Partnership Contributions			37
	
> Appendix 5 - Workflow and Budget				38

> Appendix 6 - Sefton Localities Outcome Framework	39

> Appendix 7 - Sefton Council Vision				41












Introduction 

From October 2017 Sefton Council has transformed services to create an integrated model of delivery called 'Sefton Localities'. The Youth Offending Team is part of the offer and our commitment to achieving youth justice outcomes remain a priority. Sefton has had to significantly reduce spend and has carefully prioritised resources which has impacted on the budget for the youth offending team.

Savings have been achieved by reducing a full-time post within the case manager team, streamlining the management team and moving into other council premises. Additional workers have been trained that deliver within community setting and they support young people through out of court disposals and statutory orders. 

Following a highly successful pilot for the Adverse Childhood Experience programme further funding has been secured to deliver programmes for parents and young people which will include those from the YOT cohort. We have also secured funding from Merseyside Police to deliver a holiday programme that focuses on preventing serious violence and supporting young people to understand the impacts of gun, gang and knife crime as well as offering positive activities to develop courage, trust, relationships with others and communication.

The Localities model provides an opportunity to deliver more effective early intervention and prevention services to reduce the numbers of young people entering services such as the youth justice service and children social care and enables young people to achieve better outcomes.

In early 2019, Sefton was inspected by HMIP, receiving a rating of 'requires improvement to be good' with 5 recommendations. An action plan reflects in detail how we will improve and this is supported by the YOT Management Board.

Our key priorities are:

* Promote welfare and safety of children within the youth justice system
* Prevent first time entrants to the youth justice system. 
* Divert young people away from criminality
* Reduce Re-offending
* Reduce Custody rates
* Promote restorative justice at all levels
* Improve sustainable outcomes for young people aligned with the Children and Young Peoples Plan for Sefton.
* Protect the public from potential harm 
* Understand and support victims
* Understand young people and support them to increase their chances of desistance
* Work to ensure custody is limited only for those young people whose risk cannot be managed in the community. 

Principles

The principles underpinning our service are:

* We have regard for the safety of the public as a priority
* We provide a fair and equitable service to young people, parents/carers, staff, victims and the wider community
* We treat young people as young people first and offender second
* We listen to the voice of the child and parents / carers and we evidence this within the child's record
* We have respect for diversity, we respect the needs and rights of victims, children, young people and their families
* We value our staff and ensure their wellbeing through support and supervision

Currently under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, each Local Authority must have a Youth Justice Plan that sets out how local Youth Justice Services will be delivered within the available resources.  Sefton's Strategic Youth Justice Plan illustrates our ambition, plan and priorities for 2019 - 20. 




Sefton's Vision 

"Together we are Sefton - a confident and connected borough"

Sefton's Youth Justice Plan directly supports the vision for Sefton Council. We aim to support communities and together as a partnership to make Sefton a great place to be, with services to support young people at risk of crime and exploitation and tailored support for those who enter or are at risk of entering the youth justice system.

We work in partnership with a range of services and agencies to understand the problems people living in Sefton face, so that we can shape our services to reduce the risk of crime.

We work with all relevant services to ensure that all children and young people have a positive start in life, are safe and have a healthy transition into adulthood. 

What we will do to achieve our vision?

One of Sefton's long term ambitions is to promote independent communities, whereby individuals, families and communities are able to support themselves and each other.

The future adult members of our communities are today's young people, therefore we as a partnership have a responsibility to promote positive outcomes and we will deliver this through the Sefton Children and Young Peoples Plan.  

Sefton's YOT Management Board reflects the partnership with the understanding that preventing youth offending is not the individual responsibility of any single agency but is a partnership responsibility, requiring a coordinated focus.

Our action plan in response to the HMIP Inspection reflects this partnership commitment to collectively respond and improve our services for young people.

We understand that many of our young people have had difficult lives. Some have been exposed to various forms of trauma, neglect, domestic violence, parents with mental health issues and / or substance misuse. Some have been exploited and have suffered serious harm.

Sefton YOT and partners will work together and use a trauma led approach to understand what drives a young person's offending, what has happened to them, what risks and vulnerabilities they are exposed to but also build on the young person's strengths and the protective factors that exist so that we can support their desistance and prevent them from being a victim of crime too.

This supports YJBs expectation that we will assess the needs of our cohort of children to inform our delivery decisions.

Throughout our involvement with the young person and their parents / carers, we will ensure that they are at the heart of all plans and decision making, that they have a voice that is clearly heard and understood. Their voice will be evident throughout the plans that support the young people to overcome barriers and enable them to achieve their full potential.

The Youth Justice Plan contributes to the wider Council objectives by providing an efficient service that prevents entry to and diverts young people away from the criminal justice system, intervenes effectively to prevent re-offending and reduces the use of custody for young people.



Review of Performance June 2018 - 19

Sefton's Key National Performance Indicators - June 2019

Police National Computer (PNC) Youth Justice Published data has been used to report 
on all YOT key Performance Indicators. The latest data has been obtained. 

Sefton's YOT Family 




Re-offending 2015/16

Re-offending is defined as the percentage of those young people who have re-offended from an identified cohort of first offenders. Given the small numbers within a three-month cohort the aggregated data is used, taking an average across the four quarters. This shows a Sefton rate of 47.7%; basically 4:10 young people re-offend. The rate is currently higher than the YOT Family average 43.2%, England 40.6% and Merseyside 46.1%. 


                                                    
First Time Entrants (FTE's)

This relates to those young people who receive a criminal record for the first time. When comparing Oct 17 to Sept 18 with Oct 16 to Sept 17, the rate increase is from 215 to 261 per 100,000 or in actual numbers this translates to an increase from 51 to 62 in the same time period. 



Sefton's Performance continues to be comparable to Merseyside with a rate of 267 and England 250. Performance is not as good when compared to the overall rate of the YOT family 221.  Sefton is slightly below average, listed seventh as having the highest rate of FTE's out of 10 similar YOTs. Sefton and three other YOTs have an increased rate for 2018/17 compared with 2016/17. 

Sefton's continues to be proactive through prevention strategies, particularly with out of court disposals and the use of Community Resolutions. FTE's are also locally tracked at the end of each quarter using data from the YOT criminal justice system, while these figures are not always comparable, local tracking shows that the numbers are continually decreasing.




Custody Rates
Custody Rate is the number of young people receiving a custodial sentence.  Sefton's custody rate is 0.04, the lowest rate over the last five years. Performance compares extremely well when compared to Merseyside 0.36, England 0.32 and the YOT family average 0.18. Sefton has the lowest rate of custody amongst the Merseyside YOTs and performance is extremely good within the ranking of the YOT family.



Expressed in numbers of young people receiving a custodial sentence this translates
as, 1 young person received a custodial sentence within January 2018 to December
2018 compared to 4 within January 2017 to December 2017. 




Trends

Re-offending

Chart 1. Reoffending rate- Annual weighted average - April 2012 - March 2017


Chart 1 shows Sefton has some fluctuations in the rate of re-offending over the past five years.  From April 15 - Mar 16 to Apr 16 - Mar 17 saw an increase of 5.6% .  This will be further investigated and monitored both nationally and via local tracking. 


First Time Entrants

Chart 2. Actual Number of First Time Entrants - October 2014 - September 2018


Chart 2 show the numbers that impact upon the changes in the rate of first time entrants.  This can fluctuate by small numbers of young people coming into the criminal justice system.  The latest quarters have shown an increase that has been monitored, however local tracking has seen a significant decrease.


Custody Rates

Chart 3. Custody Rate per 1,000 Young People

Chart 3 shows Sefton's Custody Rate is the lowest for the last five years, recent local tracking finds this continues to be the case. 

Conclusion

There is a small increase in re-offending rates, this will continue to be monitored both nationally and through local tracking.  Sefton YOT has strong performance with regards to a continued reduction of custody rates and local tracking from previous quarters has also shown a significant decrease in the number of first time entrants. 



 





Structure and Governance

Governance

Youth Offending Teams (YOTs), established by the Crime and Disorder Act, are statutory multi-agency partnerships between the Local Authority, Police, Probation and Health.

Sefton has an established YOT, governed by the YOT Management Board, emphasising the significance of partnership engagement and cooperation in the delivery of youth justice services. The team and governance structures are shown at Appendix 2 and 3 respectively

The role of Sefton's YOT Management Board is to:

* Determine how the YOT is to be composed, how it is to operate and what functions it is to carry out.
* Determine how appropriate youth justice services are to be provided and funded
* Agree the annual Youth Justice Plan.
* Oversee the appointment and designation of a YOT Manager
* As part of the Youth Justice Plan, agree measurable objectives linked to key performance indicators, including the National Standards for Youth Justice.

The YOT Management Board holds the Youth Offending Team and statutory partners to account by reviewing performance on a quarterly basis. Each quarter the performance against the national indicators is reported to the board and scrutinised by the partnership, who have requested further investigation to understand specific aspects where there have been changes in performance.

The Board also requires assurance as to compliance with National Standards and any issues relating to the placement of young people within the secure estate. The Board has strong links to the Local Safeguarding Children's Board and the Safer Communities Partnership. YOT also reports annually to the Corporate Parenting Board and is represented at the Children's Improvement Board, therefore there is a great deal of scrutiny in how YOT delivers services to the vulnerable group of young people who access the service.

Evidence of how partners work together to improve outcomes for children

Sefton is within its first year of working within the new Locality structure for early intervention and prevention. Staff are now integrated into three multi-disciplinary teams based in South, Central and North of the borough. YOT staff are situated in offices alongside Social Workers from Children Social Care and various staff from other services, who share the same buildings.  There is more joined up working as staff from the different agencies are able to have case discussions daily rather than communicating via email and telephone. Family Wellbeing Centres are also situated in each Locality enabling good links with Early Help services.  
To build on this, we are developing a multi-agency problem solving team called the Sefton Huddle where staff from a range of agencies within that locality meet on a weekly basis to discuss stuck cases in a confidential setting. This approach supports whole family working and includes services such as housing, voluntary agencies, welfare rights, police, fire and family wellbeing staff to name a few.

Risk and Welfare Management Meetings now take place in the Locality where the child lives meaning there is better attendance from other agencies e.g. schools and of course if the child is open to CSC the relevant Social Worker.

The Out of Court Disposal Panel meets weekly and is attended by YOT staff, Police, Criminal Justice Liaison and Diversion Team and Early Help staff. The Criminal Justice Liaison and Diversion Team advise the panel on possible mental health concerns and provide mental health assessments to assist both decision making and intervention.  The panel was rated as Good in our recent inspection in terms of information sharing and decision making.  

How you have assessed the needs of the cohort to inform and influence delivery decisions?

Sefton YOT continues to use Asset Plus as the main method of assessment for children and young people. As a result of the recent inspection, we have adopted the "less is more" approach to ensure that information gathered is streamlined, recorded in the appropriate place and that offence analysis has greater clarity. The 'What Do You Think' self-assessment tool (WDYT) is used for both the child and the parent and is incorporated into the main assessment to ensure the voices of the child and parent are captured. We are currently in the process of devising a Survey Monkey to ensure accurate and timely feedback from children and young people to further enhance the quality of our programme delivery.

When there are issues with young people's compliance, YOT arranges a 'back on track' meeting. This is usually chaired by an Operational Manager and attended by the young person, their parent/carer, their Case Manager and Programme Delivery Worker. At the meeting the reasons for non-compliance are explored and where necessary adjustments made to the young person's intervention plan to encourage regular engagement. It is often the case that the delivery setting is changed to one where the young person feels more comfortable or is nearer to their home or school.

The move to Locality working has provided much greater scope for programme delivery. Now working in close partnership with colleagues from other departments within the Council E.g. Libraries and Leisure Services, we are able to more easily access a variety of locations to provide more appropriate settings for young people. We now regularly use facilities such as Libraries, Sports Centres, Family and Wellbeing Centres, Youth Projects, Community Centres and Connexions Offices on a more regular basis. 

Assessment and family feedback highlighted the need for greater support for young people experiencing mental health problems who did not meet the threshold for specialist CAMHS, or for whom the waiting list was too long. YOT collaborated with 'Venus', a local project which provides support for young people experiencing emotional or mental health difficulties, and they appointed a Youth Justice Therapist. This has bridged a gap in terms of providing counselling and support for young people at risk of becoming first time entrants or who have completed court orders but are at risk of re offending. The therapist works with those who have been referred by YOT staff to the CJLD Team and have been assessed by them as requiring counselling or support on a voluntary basis. This intervention has greatly enhanced our Out of Court offer as well as providing effective exit strategy from statutory orders where necessary.

How we have identified local priorities?

Sefton YOT will continue to deliver on the key performance measures: reducing re-offending, reducing the use of custody and reducing FTE. As part of our YOT Improvement Plan we are committed to improving our data and our analysis, which will help us identify and respond to local needs. 

Since moving into Locality working have begun to look at the picture across the whole of the borough as well as each individual locality. We are examining offence types, ages and gender and type of intervention. The benefit of using this approach means we are able to have a bird's eye view of the borough and an insight into hotspots and areas where needs are different and respond accordingly. We are also in the process of improving our analysis and are committed to not just looking at the quantitative data but the qualitative information in relation to the 'toxic trio' and trauma. For example, going forward all assessments will identify cases where toxic trio is an issue and we are able to respond by providing the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE's) programmes to parents and to young people. 

The issue of gangs remains prominent within Sefton where we experience challenges from both organised criminal gangs and urban street gangs. In response to these issues YOT is represented on our Multi Agency Child Exploitation (MACE) meetings and we are involved in amending the Pan Merseyside Child Exploitation Protocol to reflect the changing landscape and to help provide consistency and pathways. The majority of young people on statutory orders are very complex, a high proportion having experienced trauma through adverse childhood experiences (ACES) and are often already entrenched into criminal lifestyles.  

There are significantly higher numbers of out of court cases being supported by YOT than there are statutory orders. An example of how we are responding to what we know is by targeting and delivering group programmes aimed at those who could potentially enter our statutory cohort. We have begun a pilot programme in Sefton targeting young people on the periphery of crime and anti-social behaviour based within a local pupil referral unit with the aim to divert these young people from ever entering our service. We have also enhanced our offer to out of court disposals by enabling youth justice workers to continue to support young people on early help plans once the out of court work has been completed, addressing the wider needs of the young person and the family. We also offer whole family work where we identify unmet need that could drive offending, exploitation and anti-social behaviour.   

How do we measure and report impact? 

Our impact is measured and reported using YJB data returns which enable us to measure our effectiveness against our neighbours. As referred to earlier we are developing our use of existing data so we will be able to measure our impact more effectively. Traditionally it was viewed that south Sefton was the area in which we experienced the most youth crime, however in our new localities we can now see that the opposite is the case and that South has the lowest amount of offences. We now have a clear picture across our 3 areas and can track any changes so that we can respond better. 

The Localities Outcomes framework will enable YOT to measure performance for those young people managed through an out of court early help plan. The Framework can be seen at Appendix 7.

Following our recent HMIP inspection there will be changes to the operation of our management Board. A development day has been planned for our management board in November in which our cohort profile will be examined and new local targets will be agreed. We are looking at SEND, gender, age, offence types and levels of risk within each locality and will continue to drill down into the impact we are having as a YOT with our partners on outcomes. After the inspection HMIP highlighted that they received remarkably high levels of feedback from young people and parents that was incredibly positive about the impact and service. This would strongly indicate that we have a dedicated workforce who are able to build trust and engage well with young people in a meaningful way. 

We are re-introducing an on-line survey for young people and parent/carers which will provide us with feedback about the impact our interventions have had on them. The measurement of impact is a constant challenge particular since many of our young people receive a high quality bespoke programme tailored to their needs on an individual basis. We are refreshing all our quality assurance and supervision tools which will go some way to address the effectiveness and impact on our interventions. We are part of a multi-agency quality assurance group lead by Sefton Safeguarding in which cases are examined from a multi-agency perspective and quality and impact are thoroughly scrutinised. 

Sefton has delivered sessions in conjunction with 'Street Doctors' in response to emerging issues with gangs and violent offences. Feedback from this was overwhelmingly positive with young people expressing a sense of achievement, they said that they developed new skills. Sefton YOT continues to develop innovative projects such as the summer holiday programmes. This programme is an enhanced offer to address criminal exploitation and violence in which young people attend a programme that consists of developmental group and focused group work. 

How we are responding to and mitigating against risks to delivery?

Sefton Youth Justice Risk Management Policy is scheduled to be reviewed in Oct 2019 to be agreed at the Youth Justice Board Dec 2019.  The policy will take in to account changes to reporting of serious incidents since May 2018, when the removal of mandatory notifications to the Youth Justice Board was agreed nationally. Serious Incidents are now reported to the YOT Management Board and LSCB and a critical review panel is formed by the Service Manager for YOT, including the Chair of the Youth Justice Board and wider partners.  The initial meeting of the panel will review the critical Incident review (single agency view at this point) and the agree outcomes and impact to services.  We have completed our first Critical Learning Review and have the opportunity to engage in the new process and review accordingly.   

Following the HMIP inspection in February 2019 developments to our Risk Welfare and Management practice is underway and will reflect a new format and recording tool including signs of signs of safety, our partnership, child and parent voice and the use of desistance factors to support mitigation and or escalation of risk.   

We have also increased our capacity increasing our early help workers by 2.5 full time equivalents to support increasing numbers of young people coming through out of court disposal and to embed continues support via step down to early help services through the consistent engagement and intervention through one plan, one worker with an established relationship. In addition, as part of our Localities model, two PCSO's will join the early help team and part of their role will support Community Resolution early help plans, which they will lead on.

Due to the Locality restructure, we no longer have a dedicated Performance and Quality Assurance Manager, however we have agreed the performance mechanism to be supported through the corporate business intelligence and performance team.  

We have a new training plan reflecting priorities for whole team training and development with a focus on trauma informed practice.  This will enable us to build our 'child first offender second' culture and embed trauma informed practice.    

To support good Quality Assurance (QA) we have agreed new QA tools, we are also part of a multi-agency quality assurance group lead by Sefton LSCB within which cases are examined from a multi-agency perspective and quality and impact are thoroughly scrutinised. 






Resources and Value for Money

Sefton has had resource and funding reductions since 2010, with significant reductions to the YOT budgets from the Youth Justice Board and partners. 

In addition to YJB and council funding, Sefton YOT continues to receive financial and staffing contributions from Health, Police / PCC and Probation, albeit with reductions. There have been staffing reductions from partners through their own review and restructure of services resulting in a revised CAMHs commission and a reduced staffing contribution from Probation and changes to health provision. Young people who offend will have continued access to health assessments although North West Boroughs NHS no longer second staff into the team, however they do have an enhanced nursing services and there are established pathways to ensure that young people are adequately assessed. 

YOT continues to include the statutory partners with integrated staff from Police, Probation, Social Workers with access to education and health support. Sefton is compliant with YJB grant terms and conditions. 

Previous funding has been allocated to enable YOT to develop and increase the capacity to deliver safe and competent Restorative Justice. Unpaid Work Requirements for 16 and 17yr olds. The responsibility for delivering unpaid work was transferred to Youth Offending Teams in 2014.

The cost of placements for remands and custody met by the Local Authority is managed outside of the YOT service.



Partnerships

Sefton's YOT Management Board meets quarterly and is chaired Sefton's Area Commander, Merseyside Police. There is representation on the Board from Children's Social Care (LA), Communities (LA and includes YOT), Education (LA), National Probation Service, Sefton Clinical Commissioning Groups, Public Health, North West Boroughs NHS, Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) and Neighbourhoods and Partnerships, Sefton Council for Voluntary Services, Sefton at Work and the Head of IMPACT (pupil referral unit) as a co-opted member.

The YOT Management Board links in with other governance structures such the Local Safeguarding Children's Board (LSCB) and the Sefton Safer Communities Board. The Head of Communities reports to both boards. The priorities of the Sefton YOT reflect those of our partners and align with the priorities of the Merseyside Criminal Justice Board and the Merseyside Police and Crime Commissioners Police and Crime Plan.

On a local level, YOT is represented at a number of key partnerships and forums including the LSCB and its various subgroups, the Corporate Parenting Board, and the Children's Improvement Board.  The service manager also reports to the Cabinet Member bi-monthly and Overview and Scrutiny panel quarterly.

YOT supports Sefton's local priorities for young people captured in the Children's and Young People Plan and through the work of the LSCB.  YOT supports and contributes to the following thematic work streams which meet the objectives of the local priorities.

* Neglect, Child Exploitation / Missing and Early Help Subgroups
* LSCB Vulnerable People Group
* Practice Review Panel
* Corporate Parenting Board
* Information Management and Governance Group
* Multi-agency Response to Serious and Organised Crime
* Children at Risk Multi Agency Conference
* Females Involved in Organised Crime
* Emotional Health and Wellbeing Steering Group
* Domestic Abuse Multi Agency Conference

At a regional level, the Sefton YOT is a member of the Merseyside Criminal Justice Board, the Youth Performance Improvement Group and the Merseyside Out of Court Disposals Scrutiny Panel. Additionally, Sefton YOT is represented on the Merseyside Reducing Re-offending subgroup, Merseyside Domestic Violence Strategy subgroup, Hate Crime Subgroup, and the Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) Strategic Management Board. YOT also supports the Merseyside Child Death Overview panel and Suicide Reduction Groups.

Partnerships

Health and Wellbeing Board

The Director for Social Care and Health and other YOT stakeholders are members of the Health and Well-being Board and their representation facilitates performance and health outcome measures being reported. The links between the YOT Management Board and the Health and Well-Being Board will be used to support and drive forward the emotional and mental health developments for young people.

Sefton has developed strong links with VENUS, a local provider who have employed two Youth Justice Support Therapists that offer emotional support to young people who access the Out of Court Disposal services. YOT is working in partnership to ensure that emotional support can be extended to all children to enter the youth justice service.

Merseyside YOTS 

Within Merseyside, there are five metropolitan boroughs and each has a YOT. Each YOT lead along with the lead for Cheshire West, Halton and Warrington YOT form the Greater Merseyside Youth Justice Strategic Leads Collaboration. 

The YOT Leads meet every 6 weeks and aim to:

* Promote value in all YOT functions and resource management
* Use strategic intelligence to develop an informed and collaborative approach to improve effectiveness and practice across Greater Merseyside 
* Promote effectiveness regarding safeguarding and public protection across Greater Merseyside. 

This group along with the Youth Performance Improvement Group (YPIG) are key forums for collaboratively driving forward developments in youth justice practice with our partners. Examples of this over the last year include our collaborative training plan, court merger joint planning and working together to resolve some issues around appropriate adult representation for young people.

Children's Social Care (CSC)

The Service Manager attends the CSC Senior Management Team meetings to ensure that processes are joined up to support young people and promote safeguarding. YOT Operational Managers attend quarterly managers meetings with CSC, plus raising awareness events and market place sessions.

YOT Worker's attend Looked After Children (LAC) care planning meetings likewise CSC workers will attend the Risk and Welfare Management Meetings for high risk and vulnerable young people so that workers can ensure that the plans complement each other.

Sefton Turnaround (previously Troubled Families)

The Localities Service includes Sefton Turnaround Programme and has an established pathway for notification and monitoring outcomes.  Interventions are coordinated for young people and their families presenting with multiple, often complex needs. YOT and the Early Help service identify families who meet the criteria for the programme and ensure that they receive the right support at the right time. Sefton has a target of 2130 families to support by 2020 and youth offending will remain as one of the identifiers and outcomes measures. 

The locality outcome framework is at Appendix 6.

National Probation Service (NPS) and CRC

YOT works closely with NPS to support the Joint Transition Protocol, based on national guidance so that the transition from YOT to probation services for young people is a smooth as possible and that the young people and their families are prepared and supported to receive adult criminal justice services. NPS contribute financially to YOT as well as seconding a member of staff on a part time basis, and they oversee the transition cases with joint supervision support from YOT and NPS.

Prevent

All staff have engaged in Prevent / Terrorism Training and as a workforce are clear about the pathways to deal with extremist or radicalisation concerns through MASH (Multi Agency Safeguarding Hub). Anyone from the community or a professional can raise a concern though MASH which is assessed.

The Prevent Guidance is available for the community and professionals via the Sefton LSCB website. 

YOT has not yet managed any young people who have been involved or suspected in being involved in radicalisation or extremism, however would utilise the multi-agency CHANNEL process to ensuring that the right support and interventions were available.

Relationship with the Secure Estate

We have developed a good relationship with Wetherby Youth Offenders Institute following YOT raising concerns regarding the welfare of young people placed there. One Sefton young person was on remand who displayed challenging behaviour and Sefton staff attended Wetherby several times to discuss the issues and negotiate an appropriate action plan. Whilst there were some hurdles, the outcome was positive and Sefton is confident that joint working is established with Wetherby.

Settlement Post Custody

In Sefton, planning or resettlement starts at the point of custody. Specific and/ or unmet needs are identified through ongoing assessment, led by YOT case managers throughout the sentence, including a request for an Education Health and Care plan. The EHC plan is also assessed post custody.

Sentence planning meetings are held in line with National Standards, there is contact throughout the sentence with family and carers and they are invited to care planning meetings. Sefton YOT have undertaken visits to young people in the secure estate and maintained contact with family members above national standards as a response to specific safeguarding concerns to young people while placed within the secure estate. 

Clear pathways are in place for information exchange with the secure estate to ensure good outcomes upon transfer to the community. Young people transferring to the community can be referred to specialist provision across Merseyside for education, training and employment placements and all young people transferring to the community will be referred to the health provision for YOT.

YOT have no specific accommodation available however referrals are made to Children Social Care, NPS or Sefton's Homelessness Unit, supported by the accommodation staff from the secure estate as necessary.

Domestic Abuse

Sefton has a dedicated Domestic Abuse Team and the high and very high-risk cases are managed through a fortnightly MARAC (multi-agency risk assessment conference). There is a clear pathway for YOT referrals to MARAC and where the case relates to a young person with YOT, a case worker with knowledge of the case will attend, or support by providing information relating to cases that involve YOT service users.

YOT and the broader Localities offer supports young people who are exposed to or commit domestic violence against their parents or carers and workers are trained to facilitate specific programmes. We also work in partnership with domestic abuse services in the voluntary sector, such as Sefton Women's and Children's Aid (SWACA) and Venus.













Risks and Opportunities for Future Delivery against the Youth Justice Outcomes Measures

Following the retirement of Sefton's Chief Executive, the YOT Management Board has appointed a new Chair, who is the Area Commander for Sefton, Merseyside Police. This is an opportunity for growth within the partnership in how they advocate for YOT in their own service and drive shared accountability.  This will be reflected both strategically and operationally with joined up analysis to understand the needs of the cohort, predicative trends and key performance indicators.

Following the HMIP inspection, we are revisiting partnership agreements and pathways to ensure that any gaps highlighted by the inspection are addressed. One example where health pathways were challenged is the new provision of preventative services through access to online counselling services KOOTH, which is available 365 days a year and access to youth justice therapists at Venus.  

To address the growing concerns relating to serious violence, the Community Safety Partnership will develop a Serious Violence Strategy. Sefton has secured some funding from Merseyside Police to deliver programmes and support the voluntary sector work with young people at risk of exploitation and involvement in crime. For example, YOT are delivering a Summer Programme to vulnerable boys within the YOT cohort and a new Youth Café called The Mix launches on July 5th provide universal and targeted support that the YOT cohort will be signposted to.

Sefton has also progressed to the second round in a Strengthening Families Bid and is developing future bids for Youth Endowment Fund to deliver additional programmes. 

Sefton took part on the Adverse Childhood Experiences pilot (2018) in partnership with Public Health which was evaluated by John Moores University. Due to the highly successful pilot programmes, we secured further funding to train more staff to deliver 6 programmes throughout 2019, including a programme for young people which is due to commence in late July. In partnership with Public Health and Early Help, we are developing a trauma led approach for the whole partnership which is still at the early stages of being embedded.

Sefton staff from both YOT and Localities will access training from Junior Smart Consultancy to strengthen our approaches to supporting exploited young people and those entrenched in gangs. We know that many young people do not recognise that they are being exploited within gang culture and we want to provide the best possible support to help young people get away from gangs.

Sefton funds the GANGS project (Get Away 'n' Get Safe) which educates young people about healthy friendships to prevent future exploitation, this is delivered through our schools and has had excellent feedback.

Due to the uncertainty of future funding, we are planning how to continue to fund our second Police Officer who really adds value to the team and have agreed with Merseyside Police to utilise two PCSO's to support the out of court work, which will provide good business continuity.

Sefton has an improvement plan following inspection and this will be closely monitored by the Head of Communities and the YOT Management Board.

Service User Feedback

Victim Feedback

Due to the relative paucity of the number of victim feedback forms that were returned to us, we set up a new system for collating feedback. A volunteer Community Panel Member now attends the office each month to contact victims and discuss their involvement in the process. We have found this to be a more effective way of obtaining feedback as victims have the opportunity to speak with a trained volunteer who is not a member of YOT staff. 

Below are some recent examples of victim feedback:

Example 1

JD is a 17-year-old boy who received Community Resolution for the offence of Common Assault. JD was cycling on the pavement when he knocked down an elderly lady who consequently suffered injuries to her mouth and teeth as well as her glasses being broken.
Our Victim Worker met with both JD and the victim on several occasions to prepare them for a restorative conference.
The conference itself was attended by the victim, the victim's husband, JD and the manager of the care home where JD lives. The young person spoke about his own grandmother and how he recognised the trauma that she would have experienced had she been the victim of a similar offence. He had genuine empathy for his victim and apologised profusely to both her and her husband. The Care Home manager organised payment for both the required dental work and for new glasses for the lady.

The victim said "Although it took me a little time to get over it emotionally, I had great support from the YOT. I was very pleased with the whole service especially with the Victim Worker's empathy. I know that the young man was genuinely sorry "

Example 2

GN is a 15-year-old boy who was made subject of a YCC for extensive Criminal Damage to an Information Centre run by volunteers at a local park. 

After preparing both the young person and a representative from the Information Centre for a restorative conference the meeting took place in the local Town Hall. 
The victim was able to inform to GN about the work of the centre and about how the volunteers give their time for the benefit of the local community. GN was very surprised that the staff were unpaid and also about the extent of facilities on offer, which he didn't know were available. GN also learned about how the centre was home to various items of historical interest and he was particularly shocked that there had been damage to some of these items.  He apologised to the victim and assured her that he and his friends would from then on respect the work that the centre was doing and not return unless it was for positive involvement. 

The victim said "I found the process to be a little slow but understand that this was down to the amount of time spent preparing the young person. I was very pleased with how the meeting went though and thought it was handled very well"

Example 3 

A mixed group of 2 boys and 2 girls all aged 15, admitted the offence of burglary which was committed at a local tennis club. Each young person received Community Resolution Plus.  

The club's representative did not wish to meet with the young people but requested letters of apology on the understanding that they were sincerely meant. Our Victim Worker supported the YOT Programme Delivery Workers in enabling the young people to understand the impact of the offence on club members and staff. 
Each young person wrote a letter of apology which were delivered by hand to the club's representative.

In response, the club wrote letters to the young people thanking them for their apologies. They assured them that they were satisfied with the outcome and wished them well for their futures.

The victim said "I was delighted with how the case was handled. As Chair of the committee I was able to provide feedback to members about the RJ process. Everyone was satisfied that the young people had shown remorse and we were particularly pleased with the letters of apology"

Young Person Feedback

One family were initially very resistant to working with YOT and both parents and the young person refused to acknowledge responsibility for the offence that was committed jointly by one parent and child. However, through persevering and building trust the order was successfully completed. The father sent YOT a message to the case manager saying, 
 "Just a massive thanks from me for all the support you have given him during a difficult part of his young life- you made a difference and have helped him cope '. 

On another case one of our delivery workers not only engaged with the young person but listened to the while family's needs and recognised that there was an unmet need with one of the siblings contributing to family stress.  The Panel Members feedback to our delivery worker 'the young person and his mum had nothing but praise for you. Mum couldn't thank you enough for sorting out the sensory room for her'. 

Inspectors at our recent HMIP Inspection commented on the overwhelmingly high and positive response received from young people and parent/carers when surveys where sent out to them. This indicated how good YOT staff are at engaging and having a positive impact on young people and their families.  

One young person said "It was helpful, they gave information on what you need to know because you've got in trouble-it's not a bad service, like, there's a lot worse."

One young person commented gave good feedback about a case worker and a delivery worker, "Amy and Steve are good workers, talkative and they ask you normal questions, not just like workers. They explain stuff well not like teachers in a school"

One Young person said about the work they completed "we did cannabis stuff and criminal damage stuff. It shows you the consequences so if you debate doing it again you know the outcome and why not to do it"

Another parent whose child was being criminally exploited but has since been supported over the course of his order and has managed to distance himself from the gang said about the YOT intervention " It was really helpful, she (Amy, case manager) was really good with us. She's great, really helpful really great" 





Priorities for 2019-20


Table 1 Local & National Priorities
National PriorityActionsAction OwnersMeasuring positive outcomeReducing Reoffending








* The YOT will continue good performance through positive engagement with young people, thorough assessments and high quality interventions including restorative justice that promote desistance

* YOT will focus on exploitation, working with partners to deliver positive prevention and effective interventions to safeguard the young person

* YOT works closely with Education Training and Employment services to secure opportunities for young people. 



* YOT is supporting young people to attend ACES programmes to enable emotional development and resilience to promote positive choices and create change and develop aspiration




Adele Maddocks

Gaynor McGregor 

Moira Adams





Ros Stanley* Numbers of those who reoffend continues to reduce
* Number of offences committed per reoffender reduces
* Young people feel safe




* Increasing numbers of young people engaged in education and employment and long term sustainability of these outcomes

* Feedback from young people from pilot, increased school attendance and reduction in risk that drives offending
Reduce First Time Entrants


* YOT will continue to deliver an enhanced out of court disposal service utilising restorative justice and positive exit strategies. The restructure of locality working enables whole family working, involving a range of partners.
Moira Adams

Gaynor McGregor* Numbers of first time entrants continues to reduceReduce the use of Custody




* To continue to provide good alternatives to custody (indicated by Sefton's low custody rate) with high quality pre-sentence reports that identify appropriate intensive interventions that secures the confidence of the courts and the community
Adele Maddocks

* The numbers of those in custody reducesLocal
PriorityActionsAction OwnersMeasuring positive outcomeImplementation of Locality Working

* Sefton has developed a strong early help offer, young people can now be stepped down from a statutory YOT intervention into a whole family plan to support continued need and promote positive outcomes


* Sefton is developing a detailed cohort profile that will be reviewed at a Board development day to determine local targets to be monitored by the Board.Ros Stanley






Ros StanleyA reduction in first time entrants, feedback from young people and parents.
Outcomes are linked to the Localities Outcome Framework (see appendix 6)

By November the board will have a suite of local targets determined by the board driven by the broader needs of the cohort.
 
YOT Improvement Plan 
* YOT has a robust improvement plan following the HMIP Inspection. This plan will be closely monitored by the YOT Management Board and the Head of Communities. There are clear timescales for delivery and any risks to achieving the improvement will be raised at Board level.

Ros Stanley
The actions are SMART and can be performance managed. The board have agreed the plan and work against the actions has commenced.
Plan Authorisation

NameRoleSignatureDate

Graeme Robson


Chair of YOT Management Board
Area Commander Sefton
Merseyside Police






1st August 2019

Vicky Buchanan



Director of Children's Services and Education


1st August 2019
Tanya Wilcock


Head of Communities 

1st August 2019

Brendon Prescott



Deputy Chief Nurse and Head of Quality and Safety

Anne Tattersall


Assistant Operational Director 
NWB Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust

1st August 2019

Janet Marlow



Assistant Chief Probation Officer Sefton and Liverpool


20th July 2019

(Representing YOT Management Board Statutory Partners)






Appendices

> Appendix 1 - YOT Management Board Terms of Reference 

> Appendix 2 - Youth Offending Team Structure

> Appendix 3 - Youth Offending Team Governance and Links

> Appendix 4 - Partnership Contributions

> Appendix 5 - Workflow and Budget

> Appendix 6 - Localities Outcomes Framework

> Appendix 7 - Sefton Council Vision

































Appendix 1 

Sefton YOT Management Board
Terms of Reference


Role and Purpose

The Sefton Youth Offending Team Management Board brings together the statutory partner agencies as identified in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 and non-statutory partners who make a significant contribution to:
* the effective delivery of youth justice services in Sefton
and 
* the achievement of the right outcomes for young people 

The purpose of the board is to ensure that the Youth Offending Team and the collective and individual efforts of partnership organisations:
* reduces offending, re-offending and the use of custody in line with the national objectives of the Youth Justice Board
* deliver key functions effectively with children and young people on the edge of or within the criminal justice system including 

o Engagement in education, training and employment
o access to suitable accommodation provision
o access to substance misuse services
o access to health services

The role of the Board is to:
 
* Work effectively as a partnership to ensure that the delivery of youth justice services reduces offending, re-offending and the use of custody and positive outcomes are delivered.
* Support, challenge and hold the Locality Service Manager and partner organisations to account for the delivery of agreed outcomes and plans.
* Consider the needs of the children and young people within the service and represent the needs of the YOT to their respective organisations to ensure co-ordination and value for money. 
* Oversee Performance against key outcome indicators
* Provide a strategic overview of the work of the YOT and promote positive outcomes in the context of the youth justice system and Children's and Young People Plan
* Provide support and guidance to YOT to ensure it engages with local and national priorities, promotes equality and maintains diversity
* Improve outcomes for Children, Young People and the Community
* Promote the work of the YOT.
* Ensure that Children and Young People who receive Youth Justice Services are Safeguarded
* Flag up risks or blockages to the delivery of youth justice prevention priorities
* Ensure children and young people involved in the youth justice system have access to universal and specialist services delivered by partners and other key agencies

Objectives

* Agree, and monitor the implementation of the annual Youth Justice Plan ensuring that it complements the council and partners youth justice objectives. 
* Agree an annual budget including in kind contributions and to provide support for additional targeted funding to meet identified and agreed need.
* Oversee the performance of YOT, providing strategic guidance and challenge, and hold the service and partners to account when necessary.
* Agree the protocols, contracts and service level agreements between YOT and partner agencies.
* Provide a forum for the discussion of community issues which impact upon or are affected by the work of YOT.
* To be a forum for the exchange of youth justice information between partners and YOT to promote a pro-active approach to partnership working.
* Listen to and consider the views of service users, victims of crime, sentencers and wider community. 
* To ensure that the YOS is contributing to the thematic outcomes within the Sefton Children and Young Peoples Plan
* Promote a culture of learning and lessons from community safeguarding & public protection incidents that meet the YJB serious community Incident criteria; including inspection findings and internal/ external reviews of cases.

Membership of the Board

The Board shall comprise: 
* a representative from each of the statutory partners
* a representative from any other partner providing resources 
* co-opted members 

The Board may co-opt representatives of agencies involved in criminal justice, representatives of the community, representatives of the voluntary sector involved in youth offending work and any other individual who in the view of the Board would have a contribution to make to the effective operation of the Youth Offending Service. Co-options shall normally be for a minimum of two years.

Conduct of meetings

* Meetings will be held quarterly.
* A quorum shall be 3 statutory partners plus a representative of Chief Executive of Sefton Council.
* Any sub groups established by the Board will be reviewed annually to ensure that the role and purpose of the group is still relevant.
* Board Members may nominate substitutes.
* Chair will be Sefton's Area Commander Graeme Robson, Merseyside Police from May 2019.
* Agenda papers to be forwarded to the Administrator 1 week prior to the meeting for consideration by the Chair.
* The meetings will last no longer than 2 hours.
* All members will commit to reading the papers prior to the meeting to enable them to challenge and ask questions about the information/issues raised.
* Progress and Performance Reports presented to the Board will be sent to the Chair of Sefton LSCB and to the Safer and Stronger Community partnership.

Standing Agenda Items and Reports

Standing items on the agenda to include key strategies, performance and budget decisions and safeguarding.

YOT Board Membership (Revised May 2019)

OrganisationRoleNameMerseyside Police ChairGraeme RobsonSefton CouncilHead of CommunitiesTanya WilcockSefton CouncilLocality Service Manager (YOT)Rosanna StanleySefton Council Locality Team Managers YOTAdele Maddocks
Gaynor McGregor
Moira AdamsProbation ServiceMerseyside Probation, Assistant Chief Probation OfficerJanet Marlow
Sefton CouncilHead of Children's Social CareVicky BuchananSefton CouncilHead of Schools ExcellenceMike McSorleySefton CouncilPerformance LeadSuzie MossmanMagistrates' CourtChairman Merseyside Youth PanelRonald PlinstonMagistrates' CourtDeputy Chair, Merseyside Court Youth PanelDiane ShepherdNHS South Sefton CCG and NHS Southport and Formby CCGDeputy Chief Nurse & Head of Quality and SafetyBrendan PrescottSefton at WorkEmployment & Skills Manager Claire MaguireSefton Council
Localities Service Manager and link to SSCPIan WillmanSefton Council for Voluntary ServicesDeputy Chief ExecutiveNigel BellamyNorth West Boroughs Healthcare NHS Foundation TrustAssistant Operational DirectorAnne TattersallIMPACTHead TeacherWendy CorlessSefton Council
AdministratorYOT Business Support


Appendix 2 Youth Offending Team Structure







Appendix 3 YOT Governance and Links




Appendix 4 Partnership Contributions

Integrated Youth Budget Sources for 2019/20 (incl. Variance with 2018/19)

Agency/Funding StreamPayment in kind
2019/20Cash Contribution
2019/20Payment in kind 
2018/19Cash Contribution
2018/19Variance
2019/20 to 2018/19Youth Justice Grant - Good Practice Grant0338,7410338,7410Merseyside Police Crime Commissioner065,000065,000
0Merseyside Police1 fte Police Officers (42,893) 01 fte Police Officer (42,893)0- 0
- Merseyside Probation Trust0.5 Probation Officers  (26,712)5,000
0.5 Probation Officers  (26,712)5,000
0Health - Clinical Commissioning (North & South Sefton)1.6 Band 6 
(63,115)25,371
1.6 Band 6 
(63,115)25,371 
0Sefton Council01,396,995
01,873,170
-476,175
 Total£132,720£1,831,107£132,720£2,307,282-476,175

							




















Appendix 5 Workflow and Budget

WorkflowBudget
* Out of Court Disposals
* Support for victims
* Working in partnership with SSCP to reduce crime and ASB
Local offer based in localities to prevent crime, ASB with targeted prevention around gun and gang risks
* Engagement with young people to support health, wellbeing, preparation for adulthood, increasing their resilience and personal efficacy including anti bullying and understand diversity
* Supporting the Prevent agenda
* Alignment of Merseyside Court Services
* Parenting Support
* Ongoing training for staff and volunteers



£190,000
* QA, National Standards Audit
* Managing offenders and reducing reoffending
* Ongoing training and support with Asset Plus
* Support to LSCB and SSCP subgroups and work streams
* Integrating Child Sexual and Criminal exploitation agendas
* Reducing Custody
* Appropriate Adult improvements to services delivery


£148,741.





Appendix 6: Sefton Localities Outcomes Framework






































Appendix 7 - Sefton Council Vision







1


