 
 
 
 
Sheffield Youth Justice Service 
 
Youth Justice Plan 
 
2019-2021 
 
 
Chair's Foreword 
 
I am pleased to have become the new chair of the Sheffield Youth Justice Service 
Management Board, and to be able to introduce the Youth Justice Plan for 2019- 2021.  The plan details our achievements in 2017 - 2019, and sets out how we plan to continue to deliver successful youth justice services in the forthcoming 2 years. 
Headline achievements are that as a result of a new truly effective multi-agency approach to prevention, intervention and diversion the number of young people in Sheffield recorded as entering the Criminal Justice System continues to fall dramatically.  The continued success in maintaining good performance in relation to education, accommodation and the number of Sheffield young people sentenced to custody is also to be celebrated. 
The achievements and progress made has been further recognised in the recent HM Inspectorate of Probation (HMIP) Inspection of Youth Justice Services in Sheffield where the service received a composite rating of being good overall with several areas of outstanding practice identified during the course of the inspection process. 
The inspection confirmed to us that the needs of the young people who become known to the service are changing and increasing in relation to their complexity, diversity and context in which these needs are present.  It further confirmed to me that it is vitally important that the performance, contribution and commitment from the partnership is strengthened to provide the strategic direction to enable the service to use resources in the most effective way, and align the available resources to the areas of greatest need. 
I am confident that the Youth Justice Service Management Board will continue to build upon the improvements already made, and become a strong, effective and significant partnership for the city.  As chair I will ensure that the governance and leadership we provide supports and promotes the delivery of a high-quality, personalised and responsive services for all children and young people. 
The Sheffield Youth Justice Service Management Board is committed to working effectively and collaboratively with all partners and agencies to reduce the numbers of young people entering the criminal justice system, and reduce re-offending of those convicted of committing crime in the city, whilst striving to maintain existing high standards and improve our performance against the national and local performance indicators and priorities where necessary. This plan sets out how we will achieve these aims alongside other national priorities wider service, partnership and local priorities. 
Victoria Horsefield - Assistant Director - Safeguarding and Quality Assurance  
Chair, Sheffield Youth Justice Service Partnership Board 
Contents  
Chair's Foreword	2 
Contents	3 
1.  Introduction to the Youth Justice Plan	4 
2.  Vision, mission statement and service values	6 
3.  Response to thematic inspections	7 
4.  Review of 2017/19 priorities	9 
5.  Review of 2018/19 performance	22 
6.  Structure and governance	35 
7.  Resources and value for money	38 
8.  Costed plan for the Youth Justice Board Good Practice Grant	40 
9.  Staffing	42 
10. Partnership arrangements	44 
11. Risks to future delivery	49 
12. Priorities for 2019-2021	51 
13. Positive comments and case studies	58 
SEND/SLT Case Study	59 
Case study:  Accommodation	61 
Case Study - Education	62 
Case Study - Substance Misuse	64 
14. Approval and sign off	67 

 
 	 
1. Introduction to the Youth Justice Plan 
 
The principal aim of the youth justice system is to prevent offending by children and young people (Crime and Disorder Act 1998).  Sheffield Youth Justice Service (YJS) continues to coordinate the provision of youth justice services across the city.  The service works in partnership to achieve the national youth justice strategic objectives which are to: 
• prevent offending 
• reduce reoffending 
• increase victim and public confidence 
• ensure the safe and effective use of custody. 
The partnership is a key contributor to the Community Safety and Children's Services responsibilities within the city, and the Service Manager holds a seat as a board member on the Safer and Sustainable Communities Partnership Board and the Vulnerable Young People Executive Board.  The YJS plays a vital role in both improving community safety and safeguarding, and promoting the welfare of children, in particular protecting them from significant harm.  Many of the young people involved with the YJS are among the most vulnerable children, and are at greatest risk of social exclusion.  Our multi-agency approach ensures that we play a significant role in contributing to addressing the safeguarding needs of these young people. 
Sheffield YJS is a multi-agency service comprising of four statutory agencies; Police, National Probation Service, Health and the Local Authority, each of whom, alongside the Youth Justice Board (YJB), hold a statutory responsibility for resourcing and supporting the partnership.   
The Service has continued its relationship with the Police and Crime Commissioner who provides both strategic and financial support to the partnership, and there is representation on the management board from the Office of the Police and Crime Commissioner.  
In addition to statutory funding partners, there is also representation within the partnership of other services which are key to the delivery of the core aims, including Sheffield Children Safeguarding Partnership (SCSP), Community Rehabilitation Company, Sheffield Futures and the Community Youth Teams.   
We are currently seeking confirmation of further representation on the board from partners in Social Care, Education, Multi Agency Support Teams for Early Help and Prevention and the Children's Hospital. 

Through our coordinated partnership approach we want to ensure that services delivered are targeted, and avoid duplication, whilst maximising effectiveness. 
There is a statutory requirement for each local authority to set out an annual plan for the delivery of youth justice services within their area.  This plan incorporates the required information on value for money, structures and governance, partnership arrangements and risks to future delivery.  The plan also provides information on local priorities, positive comments and case examples of effective practice within the Sheffield YJS partnership. 
 
Andy Stirling 
Service Manager 
Sheffield Youth Justice Service 
 
 	 

2. Vision, mission statement and service values 
 
Vision  
To be an innovative and supportive service that is successful in the work we do with young people and their families through skilled, knowledgeable, inspirational staff who are effective and accountable. For the young people we work with to feel safe, motivated and hopeful for their future. 
Mission  
Working in partnership, Sheffield Youth Justice Service will deliver a high quality service that safeguards young people and reduces and prevents offending by children and young people, thereby protecting the public. The service aims to reduce the number of young people entering, or re-entering, the criminal justice system and ensure that those few who require custody are successfully rehabilitated into their community. This will be achieved through effective intervention that promotes desistance. The service will remember the experience of victims of youth crime and will use its power to protect victims by promoting appropriate and effective interventions and sentencing. 
Values  
• Provide a quality service which is effective, efficient and value for money 
• Ensure that interventions and services are provided at the earliest opportunity and at the least possible tier 
• Regard the safety of the public as a priority 
• Provide a fair and equitable service to young people, families, victims and the wider public 
• Treat young people who offend with respect and dignity 
• Respect diversity in terms of race, gender, disability, age and sexual orientation 
• Promote the rights of victims and the rights and responsibilities of children, young people and their families 
• Work in partnership to meet assessed need and avoid duplication 
• Value staff as the service's most important resource. 
 	 
3. Response to thematic inspections 
 
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation is the lead inspectorate for youth justice services.  Each year they carry out, and publish a number of single and joint inspection reports and reports into themed areas, sometimes jointly with other inspectorates such as Joint Thematic Area Inspections (JTAI). 
The information below summarises our response to the most recently published HMIP Inspections. 
Inspection reports  
All published HMIP inspection reports relating to Youth Justice Services from August 2018 to March 2019 (12). 
Our response 
In order to benchmark our own practice across the 3 domains of the new inspection framework, to ensure that the service, partners and management board demonstrates Continuous Service Improvement, and is prepared for any regulatory audit or inspection, the Sheffield Youth Justice Service completed a full selfassessment against the findings in all the reports that had been published.   
A report was prepared and presented to the Youth Justice Service Partnership Board to help members better understand the requirements of the new HMIP Youth Justice Inspection regime, and to aid preparations for an inspection in Sheffield 
The self-assessment informed us that in the two youth justice services that had been graded as Outstanding overall they had been judged as outstanding in 9 and 7 of the 12 standards respectively, with a judgement of good in the remaining ones. The one inadequate service was deemed inadequate in 9 out of 12 standards and requiring improvement in the remainder, and that there was considerable variation in the scoring of the individual standards in some of the other areas.  
In one youth justice service, for example, the service was considered inadequate in out of court disposal assessment and planning whilst being outstanding in joint working in out of court disposals and in assessment and planning for post court supervision.  
We identified that, as with any inspection, the inspectors expect to see robust, timely, individualised, child focussed assessments, plans and reviews, with holistic interventions targeting identified risks and building desistence factors.  Without consistent quality in these areas of core business any inspection will expose poor practice.  
The review of inspection reports published, and subsequent benchmarking against our own practice, identified that we were performing well in the majority of the areas covered within the inspections and their subsequent reports.  The review helped us identify areas for improvement and further pointers to aid our inspection preparation for youth justice arrangements in Sheffield. 
Recommendations from the review included: 
• YJS Partnership Board to note the requirements of HMIP in their inspection regime, particularly regarding the organisational delivery domain which includes assessments on governance and leadership, staff, partnerships and services and information and facilities.  
• Consideration of how the partnership can further strengthen its line of sight to frontline work, and ensure that frontline practitioners and first line managers have a good understanding of existing YJS governance structures, and agree to undertake the appropriate actions.  
• The need to identify ways in which individual agencies can demonstrate how the information presented at partnership meetings impacts on their own service delivery and outcomes for children, young people and their victims, and agree to undertake the appropriate actions.  
• The need to identify further opportunities for better alignment of services to avoid silo working or duplication, and to maximise positive impact for children, young people, families and communities, and agree to undertake the appropriate actions. 
• Consideration of ways in which individual agencies or the partnership as a whole may be able to support the YJS to prepare for inspection, demonstrate positive outcomes and agree to undertake the appropriate actions. 
• Develop an action plan to feed in to our Continuous Service Improvement plan which identified actions to ensure that we are fully compliant with the recommendations in the report. 
 

4. Review of 2017/19 priorities 
Priority 	What did we say we would do? 

Did we do it and did it have the desired 

Preventing young people getting involved 	We said: 
in crime 	We will work with the Community Youth 
Teams, South Yorkshire Police and other intervention services to implement the new South Yorkshire Out Of Court Disposal Process. 
  
 
Review systems to reflect changes in process. 
 
We will work with Liaison and Diversion services who work with people in police custody to identify people with health needs and refer them out of the criminal justice system if possible. 
effect? 
We have worked collaboratively with all partners including the Community Youth Teams, South Yorkshire Police, REMEDI and Liaison and Diversion Services to implement the Youth Outcome Panel 
(YOP)   
 
 
The process involves the cases being referred through to the YJS seconded police officers, the case is then assessed mainly on offence-type, Managers who sit on the Youth Outcome Panel (YOP) discuss what is in the best interest of the child if they are previously known to either service.  
 
Case managers then undertake face-toface assessment using the YOP assessment.  This is an assessment tool developed as a shorter assessment, but one that considers information from other agencies and all aspects of risk. Asset+ is then completed for young people assessed as high in any of the domains.  
 
The assessment and recommendation is considered at the YOP which includes representatives from YJS, CYT, victim 


liaison, liaison and diversion and police, and a suitable outcome is agreed.  
 
In addition to YCC, YC and RJ/CR, the YOP can recommend No Formal Action. This allows for required intervention but supports diverting vulnerable groups from the criminal justice system. Outcomes are delivered by seconded police officers in one of three local venues and casemanagers complete the intervention in a three month period. 
 
The outcome is that: 
 
• The number of young people entering the criminal justice system continues to fall to its 
current level of 127 at the end of 
Q4 2018/19 
 
• Young people get their needs appropriately assessed, and either diverted away from the criminal justice system or be referred to the appropriate service - 
Community Youth Teams for crime prevention and YJS for formal disposals. 
 Reducing the use of custody We said: 
We will continue to develop and monitor our alternatives to custody, such as Bail We have continued to work with all partners to successfully develop and deliver a number of ISS programmes 
or YROs with Intensive Supervision and Surveillance (ISS) requirements, so that sentencers can be confident in choosing these. 
 
We will promote placements with our 
Remand Foster carers or at Aldine House Secure Children's Home as an alternative to custody and police cells, and develop a protocol to offer spare capacity across South Yorkshire. 
 
We will undertake a review with regard to the over representation of BAME young people receiving custodial sentences. 
 tailored to provide a high-quality, personalised and responsive services for all children and young people. 
  
We have reviewed existing risk management processes and introduced a new Multi-Agency Risk Management Young Person Of Concern (YPOC) process to ensure timely and consistent assessment, planning implementation and review of responses to changing risk across all domains. 
 
We have developed the BAME action plan to assist with reducing the over representation of BAME young people in the YJS.  
 
We ensure that all PSR's are culturally appropriate and have undertaken a review of the data on breach by ethnicity, referrals to specialist services within the YJS, and provide performance reports to the YJS Management Board on; 
 
• Open interventions by % ethnicity 
• Statutory interventions by % ethnicity 
• Non statutory interventions by % ethnicity 
• Custody bed nights by % ethnicity 
• FTE by % ethnicity 
• FTE to court by % ethnicity 
? FTE to custody by % ethnicity. 
 
If a young person is sentenced to custody or placed on remand we proactively encourage the young people in custody to use the complaints system where necessary.  Case managers escalate if young people feel they have not been treated fairly within the complaints system in the custodial establishment. 
 
The demand on our Remand Foster Carers reduced at the same time as the demand for social care placements for young people increased over the same period therefore we lost the majority of the Remand Foster Carer Resource. 
 
The number of custodial sentences continues to be low and our performance in relation to statistical, geographical and YOT family comparisons are very good.  
 
There were 9 custodial sentences in 2018/19. The target for the year was not to exceed 9 custodial sentences, which was the total for 2017/18. 
 
There have been 5 custodial sentences for BAME young people. The overall proportion for custodial sentences was 55% BAME. 
 
This represents a reduction of 1 young person and a percentage decrease of 
13% compared to 2017/18 
 
The custodial sentences formed 6% of total court disposals. 
 Reducing reoffending 
 We Said; 
We will continue to monitor the groups and individuals who are most likely to reoffend.  We will ensure that our assessments promote and identify desistance factors, and are reviewed and delivered in a timely manner. 
 
We will continue to develop our whole family approach in recognition of the risk and protective factors that contribute to reducing re-offending. The YPOC process ensures timely and consistent assessment, planning implementation and review of responses to changing risk across all domains including risk of re-offending. 
 
The Assessment and Intervention practice in the YJS adopts a strengths based approach to identify factors that have been found to be influential in desistance.  This approach involves creating and/or building on the young person's strengths.  In addition to helping young people to stop offending, it will also be important in preventing the onset of offending.  
 
The YJS has utilised research and information to inform and refine service delivery and deliver an evidence-based approach to desistance. 
 
The YJS has trained staff to develop their capability and capacity to support desistance, rehabilitation and reduce the risk of reoffending. 
 
Sheffield YJS adopt the principles of desistance by supporting children and young people to move away from offending.  This is done by acknowledging the wider social context of children and young people's behaviour, the importance of trusted professional relationships as a fundamental medium for change, and supporting young people to maintain or develop a supportive relationship with a parent/carer or significant adult or positive peer. 
 
The latest re-offending rate is 36.5%, amounting to 38 re-offenders from a cohort of 104. 
 
There were 104 in the cohort and 38 reoffenders.  They committed 131 offences, which is an average of 3.45 offences each.  We continue to be well below the family average of 40.7%. Education, training and employment (ETE) We said: 
 
We will maintain the strong links with training providers and liaise regularly with them both in person and over the phone regarding progress, attendance and behaviour. 
 
We will continue to ensure that there is a direct offer from providers for young The YJS has worked tirelessly to improve the educational outcomes for some of the most disadvantaged young people in 
Sheffield through innovation, creativity, tenacity, and focussing on the needs and aspirations of our young people. 
 
The YJS education specialists work collaboratively with case managers and specialists including Speech Language 
people straight from custody, and utilise and support the temporary release and mobility process to ensure a smooth transition from custody. and Communication Therapists to sequence education interventions. 
 
The YJS provides personalised interventions to each young person to remove barriers, including exclusions from education, training and employment. 
 
The YJS provides personal support such as supporting young people "through the door" to overcome any anxieties, CV writing, key communication skills, interview techniques, CSCS card training, dyslexia screenings and access to bespoke support packages.  
 
We have maintained existing, and made new and strong links, with training providers and employers.  We hold regular meetings with other children's education services and the Inclusion Centre to advocate for young people in the YJS.  
 
We continue to support young people to develop skills to maximise opportunities, access appropriate education provision, advocate on their behalf when this is not provided and provide additional support in English and Maths when a full time offer from school is not present. 
 
The education team's efforts were 
recognised by the YJS achieving Special Education Needs Quality Lead Status for securing better outcomes for our young people with SEND. 
 
Our dedicated Desistance and Resettlement Officer supports the effective delivery of resettlement support.  The benefits are maximised to young people by supporting the planning process with regard to services which will be ongoing in the community, and delivering interventions as defined in the assessment process. 
 
The outcome is that at the end of 2018/19 89.1% of young people were in ETE.  This is broken down as 95.7% of school age young people and 82.8% of above school age young people.  
 Children in Care (CiC) We said: 
 
In partnership with South Yorkshire Police we will continue to develop the Children in Care Police Officer role. 
 
The Children in Care Police Officer will work alongside the YJS, children's home staff and foster carers to support children living in residential children's homes and foster placements, and those who are on the edge of care.  This role will contribute The YJS in partnership with South Yorkshire Police established a 'Children in Care Police Officer'.   
 
The CiC Police Officer was able to establish good relationships with the children and staff, and provided children in care with someone they could trust and someone who they know will be there to support them.  
 
The CiC Officer worked alongside the 
to preventing young people from being criminalised for behaviour which can be appropriately dealt with by other means. 
 YJS, children's home staff and foster carers to reduce risks to young people most in need of safeguarding, such as those with a propensity to go missing and those with increased risk of exploitation. 
 
The CiC Officer has become the first port of call when incidents occur.  This role has provided interventions that support a  restorative approach to dealing with conflict where everyone involved, both children and carers, are brought together to discuss what has happened so that it can be put right.  
 
This has ensured that young people are making amends within the communities they live in and, most importantly, diverted from offending. 
 
The current CiC Officer supported the development of the new Out Of Court Disposal process, attending the newly formed YOP to provide up to date information on CiC which informs the panel to make their decisions. 
 
The CiC Officer role is currently being reviewed and redesigned to support Project Aspire; a multi-agency hub based in a children's home that operates a "no wrong door model".  This model strives to provide holistic support to young people 
in care, and on the edge of care.  
 
The YJS reviewed and implemented the new 'Sheffield Strategy to Keep Care Experienced Young People Out of 
Trouble'.  This document established guidelines for services working with children in care, including universal services, to act expediently and creatively to promote non-offending lifestyles for young people in care. The strengthsbased strategy focuses on improving opportunities to divert care-experienced young people from the criminal justice system and, where this cannot be done, to provide support and fair treatment to encourage desistance from offending. It has also promoted the use of restorative approaches within children's homes through the YJS providing Restorative Practice and Desistance Training to residential and foster carers. 
 
At the end of 2018/19 24 young people in the care of the local authority received youth justice disposals for offences committed while they were in care.  The target was not to exceed the 2017/18 figure of 27; so we have met that target and the direction of travel remains positive. 
 Engagement and Participation We said: Despite several attempts we have not 
We will establish a focus group of young people from within our current case load to act as a reference group for the YJS and partners. 
 
We will develop an action plan around the areas where young people who were surveyed stated that we could do better. been successful in establishing a regular focus group from within our current caseload. 
 
The aim was that the group would assist us to develop an effective strategy to collate the views of children and young people, their parents/carers and other key stakeholders which are analysed and used to review and improve the effectiveness of our services. 
 
This priority will be carried over to the new plan.  In order to achieve this we will be supported by Sheffield Futures "Young Advisors" who will assist us to develop a strategy. 
 
The strategy will include activity to provide evidence through the analysis of responses to consultations and surveys, minutes of young people's forums/groups, and actions and responses from these. 
 
The aim is to quickly identify representatives of children and young people, their parents/carers and provide evidence of where young people/parent/carer engagement and participation has led to specific improvements or changes in service delivery or activity. 
                                               
Good Case Management We said: 
In addition to National Standard Audits required by the YJB, we will continue to monitor quality through regular case sampling, and then address any weaker areas identified through our Continuous Service Improvement plan. 
 We have developed new management oversight and quality assurance procedures to provide clear guidance in respect of management oversight of casework and procedures in the Youth Justice Service. 
 
Managers review progress against a young person's intervention plan during supervision to prevent drift and promote high aspiration for the young person. 
 
Managers play a vital role in managing risk on a day-to-day basis by providing guidance in responding to incidents, unforeseen events, including new 
offences, significant events, court appearances and changing circumstances.   
 
Actions on cases from the Multi-Agency 
Risk Panel are tracked through supervision to ensure that they are completed in timely fashion. 
 
All case discussions and key decisions are recorded on Core+ as 'Management Supervision of Case'. 
 
There is a process in place to assure the quality and consistency of supervision across the service and that performance is consistently addressed.  
 
A points-based Workload Management Tool has been developed to manage and monitor caseloads and ensure safe and manageable allocation. 
 
Managers calculate points for each case manager they have responsibility for at the beginning of each calendar month. Points are accrued throughout the month and recalculated at the beginning of the next month to account for case closure and work completion. The tool incorporates calculations for pro-rata and reasonable adjustments to allow for comparison when allocating. 
 
Young people assessed as high risk are only allocated to qualified case-managers (Youth Justice Officers and Seconded Probation Officers). 
 
Managers ensure that there is sufficient oversight of cases during periods of planned and unplanned leave. This ensures that young people's appointments are in line with National Standards, missed appointments are appropriately responded to in timely fashion, and there is a point of contact for young people and families in case of changing circumstances. 
5. Review of 2018/19 performance 
 
Note:  a review of 2017/18 performance was provided in the mid-point update in July 2018. 
How we measure performance and quality 
We mainly draw our performance and management information from our case management database, Core +.  This allows Operational Managers to monitor the progress of the cases under their supervision, and provides context about demand and areas of need so that the Strategic Management team and the Partnership Board can make informed decisions about resources and priorities. 
We monitor three areas that are national priorities for the Youth Justice Board: 
preventing young people entering the youth justice system; reducing offending; and reducing the use of custody.  In addition we also monitor reducing ethnic disproportionality and the number of children who are in care in the youth justice system. 
As well as these outcome measures we also regularly monitor the quality of our work, to check it conforms to the new Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System and meets all indicators of good practice.  We do this through internal quality assurance processes, as previously described, and audits.   
As part of the implementation of the new Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System we will be required to undertake a self-assessment against all standards in September 2019. 
The performance and quality of services delivered continues to be monitored nationally by the YJB for England and Wales, and the Service Manager meetings regularly with the regional YJB Head of Innovation and Engagement and other heads of service across the region. 
In addition to monitoring key outcomes the YJB has developed new procedures with regard to performance oversight. 
Performance oversight and reporting is now undertaken by the Performance Oversight Board (POB) which is an internal YJB Board that meets on a quarterly basis to analyse the performance of youth justice services across England and Wales.  
The Board brings together national data sets and available qualitative evidence and intelligence to:  
• Monitor and report against performance trends (this includes trends that apply to the whole Youth Justice System as well as considerations of local youth justice services individually) 
• Commission quarterly activities to:  
- Notify local authorities where outcomes indicate concern 
- Undertake deep dives in areas showing signs of promising practice 
- Seek clarification where performance data indicates a significant decline, or there are prevailing performance issues 
 
• Decide on escalation procedures (where appropriate, to include extra monitoring and direct support to support change)  
 
• Share key performance findings with critical partners such as HMI Probation, Ofsted, HMI Prisons, Youth Custody Service, DoH and DfE.  
 
 
 	 

About our client group 
The following graphic gives an overview of the number of young people and victims we worked within 2017/18. 

The following graphics give an overview of the demographics and intervention needs of the young people we worked within 2018/19. 
 

 


  
The above diagram shows the three domains of risk - risk of serious harm, likelihood of reoffending and safety and wellbeing. 
180 young people were assessed during 2018/19.  The above diagram shows that of the 63 young people assessed as high in at least one of the domains, 57 had high safety and wellbeing concerns, 44 had high risk of causing serious harm and 44 had a high risk of further offending. 35 young people were assessed as being high risk in all three domains. 
 
To enable us to identify and monitor the management of the young people most likely to reoffend, at risk of causing serious harm to others and/or those for whom we have high concerns about their safety and wellbeing we have developed a new process called the Young Person of Concern (YPOC) process. 
 
The YPOC process applies to;  
 
? All young people assessed as  
 
o high or very high risk of serious harm  o high likelihood of reoffending 
o high or very high safety and wellbeing concerns 
 
The process includes an induction into the new process by a seconded police officer and YJ case manager for all young people identified in the cohort, a higher level of supervision, enhanced police intelligence and information gathering processes, consideration given to home visits by seconded police officers, increased reviews of Asset Plus and subsequent plans (every 3 months minimum) and multi-agency discussion and review at YJS Multi Agency Risk Panel (MARP) (every 3 months as a minimum). 
As part of the continuous review of all levels of risk, managers will also consult and refer to the list of young people identified as YPOC during supervision with the case manager to ensure relevant cases are included and that appropriate actions are being taken for those cases 
 
Young people will be removed from the YPOC process when their risk level reduces or their sentence ends/involvement ceases with YJS. 
 
 	 
       
     
 

Nationally monitored priorities: 
Preventing young people entering the youth justice system 
In 2018/19 there were 127 first time entrants to the youth justice system, which is equivalent to a rate per 100,000 youth population of 260. 
 
This is a reduction on 2017/18 when there were 189 first time entrants. 
 
For the period April 2017 to March 2018, Sheffield has one of the highest rates in the YOT family (366), and is well above the family average rate of 274.   
 

     
     
Reducing the use of custody 
The indicator is the rate of young people receiving custodial sentences per 1000 youth population.  At the end of 2018/19 there were 9 custodial sentences, giving a rate of 0.18 per 1000 youth population. The target was not to exceed the total of 9 sentences in 2018/19.  Therefore the target was met. 
 
Sheffield is the second best performing in the YOT family (average rate of 0.48 measured from January 2018 to December 2018.  The custodial sentences formed 6% of total court disposals (9 out of 149 court disposals).  
 
In 2018/19 there were 1042 secure remand bed nights. This was an increase on the previous year, which was a total of 766 bed nights. 
 

 
Reducing reoffending 
The reoffending rate is measured by monitoring young people who received a youth justice disposal in a 12-month period and tracking them for the subsequent 12 months to see if they reoffend, i.e. they receive an out-of-court disposal or a conviction in court.  There is a six-month lag to allow for criminal proceedings to go through, and then a final number is taken.  The time periods displayed above are therefore significantly delayed; the latest figure reported here is for July 2014 to July 2015.  This number is reported as the percentage of young offenders in the 12month cohort who have reoffended. 
 
The rate is 30.3%, amounting to 129 re-offenders from a cohort of 426 and accounting for 390 proven re-offences, or an average of 3.02 each.  As is clear from the graph, this is the lowest proportion in 6 years. 
 
The latest reoffending rate for Sheffield is therefore below average for the Core Cities (39.4%) and the national average (38%). 
 

 
 	 
Local priorities: 
Reducing ethnic disproportionality  
At the year end there were 85 BME young people receiving one or more disposal out of a total of 212, giving a percentage of 40.1%. This is above the level of the 10-18 youth population in Sheffield, as recorded in the school census. 
 
During the year, 9.4% of young people receiving one or more disposal were of 'other' White (i.e. non-British) backgrounds; 22% each were of Black and Mixed backgrounds; 5% of Asian backgrounds and 3.3% were of Chinese background. 
  
The YOT family comparison is based on the proportion of non-White young people receiving a disposal during 2017/18 as against the proportion in the youth population at the 2011 census. It is therefore quite out of date, and excludes 'other' White young people, but gives an indication of our relative position.  
 

 
 	 
Reducing the number of children who are in care in the youth justice system 
In 2018/19, 24 young people in the care of the local authority received youth justice disposals for offences committed while they were in care.  The target was not to exceed the 2017/18 figure of 27; so the target was met. 
 
Previous analysis has shown that the onset of offending often coincides with young people becoming looked after; and whatever order it happened in, these are still children in care who are known to the Youth Justice Service.   
 
The graph shows the numbers of children in care receiving new secure remands and custodial sentences (columns and numbers on left axis), and how this compares as a proportion of the total number of remands and custodial sentences (line and percentage on right axis).  It excludes young people who were looked-after solely as a result of being securely remanded. 
 
3 of the secure remands were for children in care and 2 of the custodial sentences was for children in care. 
 
 

  
    
 

 
 	 

6. Structure and governance 
 
Structure and Governance 
Youth Offending Teams were established under the statutory provisions of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.  The Act set out the requirement for a local Youth Offending Team comprising of the four statutory agencies of: the Local Authority (including Children's Services Social Care and Education), Police, Probation and Health.   
The Youth Offending Team in Sheffield is called the Youth Justice Service (YJS). 
The role and responsibilities of the YJS and the Management Board continues to be regulated by Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System. These include specific standards for YOT Management Boards which have been further extended and clarified within the requirements of Domain 1 of the new HMIP Inspection Standards. 
The YJS Management Board has a new chair who is an Assistant Director with responsibility for Safeguarding and Quality Assurance within the People Services portfolio of the local authority, who has a direct link to the Executive Director of Children's Services and in turn a direct link to the Chief Executive of the local authority. 
The YJS Management Board comprises of representatives of each of the statutory partners as well as a range of contributing members and advisors from other local partners such as, Community Safety Partnership, Community Rehabilitation Company and Sheffield Futures, the city's deliverer of Youth Services.  
Representatives from the following agencies sit on the YJS Management Board: 
Name Organisation/Agency Victoria Horsefield - Chair Sheffield City Council - People Services Portfolio Andy Stirling Youth Justice Service Helen Sweaton - Vice Chair Sheffield City Council - People Services Portfolio Marie Carroll Police and Crime Commissioners Office Liz Mills National Probation Service Andrew Sinclair Community Rehabilitation Company Andrew Jones Sheffield City Council - Inclusion and Learning Dan White Sheffield Futures Jenny Robertson CGL (Substance Misuse Services) Sapphire Johnson Clinical Commissioning Group Delphine Waring South Yorkshire Police Maxine Stavrianakos Sheffield City Council - Community Safety Partnership Katie Hewitt Youth Justice Service Sara Rodgers Youth Justice Service  
The YJS Management Board is identified as a significant partnership for the city, and provides strategic links with other children's services and Community Safety partnerships and associated strategic plans across children's services, criminal justice and community safety. 
The YJS sits in the People Services portfolio within the City Council and within Children and Families service area.  This arrangement provides that the service is best positioned to ensure effective joint work with wider children's specialist services, including those for children who are in the care of the local authority and care leavers.  The service has ensured that it retains strong links with Integrated Youth 
Services (IYS) and the Service Manager remains a member of the Children and Families strategic youth partnership meetings.  Youth crime prevention responsibilities are delivered through a mixture of direct delivery through the YJS, commissioning arrangements jointly funded though the partnership, and core council funding for targeted youth services.  The YJS takes strategic direction from the Safer and Sustainable Communities Partnership, Children and Families Senior Leadership Team and the Vulnerable Young People Executive Board.  The YJS is also a 'duty to cooperate organisation' of the Sheffield Safeguarding Board and Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements Strategic Management Board, and also has a seat on the Local Criminal Justice Board. 
The arrangement for chairing and membership of the board as set out above ensures that the board is well placed to discharge its responsibilities which include: 
• Delivering the principal aim of reducing offending and re-offending 
• Strategic performance oversight 
• Ensuring the effective delivery of justice services for children and young people 
• Accountability and representation of youth justice issues within the Local Authority 
• Ensuring that children and young people involved in the youth justice system have access to universal and specialist services delivered by partners and other key agencies 
• Ensuring local authorities discharge their duties under the Children Act 1989, in particular those in Schedule 2, paragraph 7, to: o Discourage children and young people within their area from committing offences 
o Take reasonable steps designed to reduce the need to bring criminal proceedings against children and young people in their area 
o Avoid the need for children within their area to be placed in secure accommodation. 
• Monitoring the service's response to thematic inspections 
• Overseeing the service's management and response to notified Community and Public Protections Incidents (CSPPI) 
• Providing financial governance for the partnership 
• Ensuring the services delivered have reference to the responsibility towards victims of youth offending. 
 	 

7. Resources and value for money 
 
Funding 
The funding for the Youth Justice Service for 2019/20 is made up of contributions from the statutory partners, the YJB Good Practice Grant and a grant contribution from the Police and Crime Commissioner's Community Safety Fund.  The service also oversees the local authority budget provided to meet the cost of young people remanded to the secure estate. 
The total available funding for 2019/20 for the YJS is £2,275,557. 
The terms and conditions of the Youth Justice Board Effective Practice grant continue to include setting out a clear expectation for how this grant allocation may be used. 
The YJS is responsible for commissioning, contracting and procuring services that contribute towards the key priorities set out within the plan.  Sheffield YJS continues to lead on the joint commissioning arrangements across South Yorkshire for youth justice services including victim, reparation, restorative justice and appropriate adults. 

Finance 
The table below shows the partner contributions for 2019/20.   
Table 1: Partner Contributions to the Youth Offending Partnership Pooled Budget 2019/20 
 
 Agency Staffing costs Payments in kind - revenue Other delegated funds Total Local Authority  - £776,600 £776,600 National Probation Service £104,722 - £5000 £109,722 Health Service £54,000 - £113,814 £167,814 Police and Crime Commissioner £172,800 - £233,000 £405,800 YJB Good Practice Grant - - £815,621 £815,621 Total £331,522 - £1,944,035 £2,275,557 
	Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	
8. Costed plan for the Youth Justice Board Good Practice Grant 
 
Activity / Resources  
 
 Effective practice or research benefit 
 Reference to 5 outcomes Associated Costs Ensuring that operational practice remains effective and current, and capitalises on opportunities to develop. All direct operational delivery roles within the service ? are involved in maintaining professional standards, ? engaging in professional development, including local ? and national training, and contributing to developing ? innovations in working practices.  This includes the ? development of the Junior Attendance Centre programme. This is calculated at approximately 30% of the total costs for the service.  
 Reduce FTE 
Reduce Custody 
Reduce Reoffending 
Safeguard 
Public protection £412,564 County-wide contracting  Sheffield YJS jointly contracts with partners across 	? 
South Yorkshire for services including Appropriate 	? 
Adults, Victim services and Restorative Justice ? Services. The aim is to deliver a consistent quality ? standard whilst reducing the cost for each area ? engaged in the contract. 
 Reduce FTE 
Reduce Custody 
Reduce Reoffending 
Safeguard 
Public protection £198,079 Accommodation The YJS is based in a youth building which gives the ? young people access to a variety of different services ? in one location.  The YJS also invests in a not-for- profit community organisation, the Burton Street Foundation, as a base for group work, bail clinics and Referral Order panels. 
 Reduce Custody 
Reduce Reoffending £105,000 40 
 
	Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	
Activity / Resources  
 
 Effective practice or research benefit 
 Reference to 5 outcomes Associated Costs Maintaining effective and best practice activity  
e.g. staff professional membership, periodicals, professional journals and new and innovative interventions resources. 
 The YJS has identified a training budget to ensure ? that it is able to effectively induct new members of ? staff and maintain existing staff in best practice and ? current thinking. 	? 
 	? 
 Reduce FTE 
Reduce custody 
Reduce reoffending 
Safeguard 
Public protection £10,000 
 
 Speech and Language 
provision 
 The YJS commissions a Speech and Language 	? Therapist, who assesses and work with young people 	? to establish their communication strengths and 	? difficulties, and who also screens for dyslexia. 	 
 Reduce custody 
Reduce reoffending 
Safeguard £32,280 Resettlement development The YJS has a flexible resettlement fund, which is ? used in a tailored and personalised way to help young ? people to settle back into the community following a ? period in custody. 	? 
 Reduce custody 
Reduce reoffending 
Safeguard 
Public protection £5,000 Accommodation resource 
 
 
 The YJS commissions an accommodation provider to ? provide 15 beds for young people involved with the ? service. 	? 
 	 
The Accommodation Worker included in this contract provides support to the young people. Reduce custody 
Reduce reoffending 
Safeguard £59,312 41 
 

Youth Justice Plan 201
 
9. Staffing 
 
Sheffield YJS continues to maintain secondment arrangements with South Yorkshire Police, with four seconded Police Officers, and the National Probation Service, with a reduced contribution of one seconded Probation Officers.  At the time of writing, we have 155 members of staff (including 27 sessional staff and 71 volunteers).  A breakdown of gender and ethnicity is shown below.   
 
Sum of Head CountAdministrativeOperational 
ManagerPractitionerStrategic 
ManagerVolunteerSessionalReferral 
Order panel 
VolunteerGrand TotalFMFMFMMFMFMFMAny other ethnic group1113Asian112329Black1111329Mixed1214White83622291381379103131Grand Total103632510140141314143156 
 	 
42 
 


43 
 

10. Partnership arrangements 
 
The Youth Justice Service continues to enjoy a strong and effective representation at management board level and this is further replicated within the service with regards to delivery.  The mix of funding and staff deployment from the statutory partners ensures that there is effective and meaningful partnership working between Health, Probation, Social Care, Police services, Sheffield City Council and key third sector organisations within the city.   
The service is based in the city centre "youth hub" at Star House which hosts a collection of services for children and young people including Children in Care Service, Care Leaving Service, Community Youth Teams, Sexual Exploitation Service, Missing Young People 
Service, Child Criminal Exploitation Team, Sheffield Futures, Door 43 Young People's Health and Wellbeing Service and the Integrated Youth Service. 
The YJS is represented within a number of key forums and partnerships across the city and county including the Community Safety Partnership, Local Criminal Justice Board, MultiAgency Public Protection Arrangements Strategic Management Board, Vulnerable Young people's Executive Board, Corporate Parenting Board, Integrated Offender Management Group and the local and county reducing re-offending groups.  Membership of these key strategic forums provides the opportunity for the Service Manager, and board members, to ensure that the needs and profile of young people involved in, or at risk of entering, the criminal justice system are considered when developing local policies and setting priorities for resourcing. 
The service also works closely with the three other Youth Offending Teams in South Yorkshire to ensure that opportunities for joint contracting and the sharing of resources are taken up.  Arrangements are in place to establish a formal relationship with the Police and Crime Commissioner which complements the monitoring arrangements and synergies between the services and the Police and Crime Plan. 
 
We have enhanced our partnership information sharing protocols and agreements to ensure holistic assessments and timely delivery of intervention to improve outcomes for young people who offend. 
Through our partnerships with health the embedding of Specialist Speech, Language and Communication Therapists (SLTs) within the YJS has enabled us to continue to develop a range of creative and innovative ways of working with young people to assess and identify support, and interventions, to meet young people's speech, language and communication needs (SLCN). 
 
 
Youth Outcome Panel 
The new out of court process is based around the multi-agency YOP process. Cases are referred into the YOP by electronic case management systems to the seconded police officers within the YJS. Once a referral is received it is discussed at the YOP and is allocated to either the CYT or YJS.  The relevant service will undertake an assessment which will be presented to a multi-agency panel with representatives from YJS, CYT, SYP and seconded staff from health and victim liaison services.  The panel will discuss the assessment and ratify the recommendations and outcomes. The appropriate service identified to undertake the intervention will undertake their normal processes for further assessment, if required. Any cautions or conditional youth cautions will be administered by seconded police officers in the YJS and CYT.  This enables the delivery of caution and any associated enforcement action to be managed by one team and in one building which integrates interventions and improves service to young people, families and victims.  We see information sharing and effective and appropriate use of partner agencies' electronic case management systems important to enable us to work with young people and deliver positive outcomes for them. Staff within the YJS partnership have access to  a variety of intelligence and electronic case management systems, including Connect and the Missing Persons data base, (Police) SystmOne (Health), ONE (Multi Agency Support Teams and Education), SIMS (Education), Delius (NPS), Liquid Logic (Social Care) and our own Youth Justice Case Management system, Core+. 
Child Criminal Exploitation 
The service contributes to the work of 'Operation Fortify' which is Sheffield's partnership approach to dealing with serious violence, organised criminality and child criminal exploitation.  
At the centre of Operation Fortify is a co-located multi-agency team, who has the role of coordinating and monitoring activity to tackle serious violent crime across Sheffield. It is the responsibility of this team to gather information and intelligence, to map and monitor organised criminality and violent crime in all its forms.  This team ensure that active steps are taken to target, disrupt and prosecute those individuals who participate in, or indeed orchestrate, this activity in our neighbourhoods.  
 
This multi-agency, proportionate response to risk includes an offer focused on Prevention, Diversion, Disruption and Enforcement.  The Child Criminal Exploitation team consists of staff and managers from social care, YJS, CYT, Multi Agency Support Team and Integrated Youth Service. 
   
The South and West Yorkshire Resettlement Consortium 
This provides a clear structure within the city for the arrangements for mapping, assessing risk and coordinating interventions for minimising youth violence and gangs within the city. 
Sheffield YJS is a lead member of The South and West Yorkshire Resettlement Consortium which was established in 2014.  The consortium has strong support from a wide range of stakeholders, including:  Police and Crime Commissioners, Secure Estate, Youth Offending Teams, Beyond Youth Custody (national resettlement research programme), Police, Probation, DWP, the Youth Justice Board and NHS England.  The University of Bedfordshire became an academic partner in early 2017.  There is a Strategic Group and an Operational Group who meet on a quarterly basis. The consortium recognises the need for a co-ordinated holistic response to the multiple complex needs of offenders, and a smooth transition from custody to community.  Central to achieving these elements is the partnership between agencies.  This means effective co-operation between custodial providers and community agencies as well as widespread partnership coordination in the community post release to address offenders' multiple needs. The consortium is in the unique position of having collected data on all young people in the area sentenced to custody since November 2014 and this information is used to influence its priorities and work plan for the consortium.  This work has been undertaken by officers from each YJS and then collated centrally to give a picture across South and West Yorkshire. 
The consortium has a range of strengths, including: 
• Enables joint working and standard setting at a strategic level e.g. has set local standards around post custody accommodation which have been adopted across Yorkshire & Humber 
• Provides an operational managers forum to share effective practice and problem solve 
• Offers a combined voice when responding to changes in national policy or consultations 
• Enables sharing of resources between areas for a relatively small cohort 
• Provides an evidence base and allows data comparison through the resettlement tracker.  This work will potentially be further enhanced by the involvement of the academic partner 
• Gives a focus on a complex and vulnerable cohort who could cost the public sector a considerable amount if their offending continues. ·          
• Provides a platform for obtaining funding on a regional basis.  
The current objectives of the consortium are: 
• Understand the local cohort and analyse need  
• Raise the standard of the 'resettlement offer' across South and West Yorkshire 
• Work with local, regional and national government to deliver required change 
• Ensure appropriate allocation of resources in accordance with identified need and ensure best value  
• Promote communication through providing stakeholders with timely and relevant progress updates 
• Undertake performance monitoring and evaluation of work undertaken 
• Identify and share effective practice in the consortium and nationally 
• Raise awareness of the work of the 'value added' through work undertaken in custody. 
Sheffield is an active partner in the work of the consortium at Strategic and Operational levels and participates in the programmes and schemes.  Sheffield also contributes financially for jointly funded projects which provide cost benefits for the YJS. 
Prevent   
Sheffield YJS upholds a commitment to address extremism. The Service Manager has been part of the Prevent strategy since its inception in Sheffield.  The Assistant Service Manager sits on the Sheffield Prevent Silver Group, and brings relevant information relating to Prevent back to the organisation to be used in context to ensure that safeguarding remains at the heart of Prevent. 
The YJS has delivered the Workshop to Raise Awareness of Prevent (WRAP) training to the whole service, and also assisted in joint training of partners in the wider children's services in respect of Prevent. The YJS operational lead ensures that Prevent stays at the forefront of practice.  A central log is kept of all issues and concerns which have been referred into the Prevent and Chanel processes so that we can identify and respond to themes and issues. 
Sheffield has adopted the nationally recommend governance with regard to the Channel Panel. The panel meets monthly and is chaired by a senior Sheffield City Council manager within the Community Safety Partnership. Initial referrals are shared with Children/Adult Safeguarding for initial assessment and information sharing. The Channel Panel will then assess and agree whether to adopt or not adopt the case and agree actions to reduce risks. 
Care Experienced Young People 
The 'Sheffield Strategy to Keep Care Experienced Young People Out of Trouble' has had a significant impact on reducing the number of young people in the care of the local authority who received youth justice disposals for offences committed while they were in care. 
The strategy has established clear guidelines and opportunities for services working with children in care to act expediently and creatively to promote non-offending lifestyles for young people in care. It is relevant to every service that works with children in care, including universal services. 
The strategy has a strengths-based focus on improving opportunities for young people in care, to divert them from the criminal justice system wherever possible and, where this cannot be done, to provide proper support and fair treatment through the criminal justice system to encourage young people to desist from offending. 
 
It has also promoted the delivery of restorative approaches and interventions within children's homes through the YJS  providing Restorative Practice and Desistance Training to residential and foster carers. 
 
Robust implementation of the 'Crown Prosecution Checklist' by the YJS also supports the de-criminalisation of children in care as Youth Specialists' within the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) are reminded of the need to consider all the circumstances surrounding the offence, and the circumstances of the young person, before reaching a decision to prosecute. 
The YJS in partnership with South Yorkshire Police established a 'Children in Care Police 
Officer'. The purpose of the role is to work alongside the YJS, children's home staff and foster carers to support children living in residential children's homes and foster placements, and those who are on the edge of care.  The role contributes to preventing young people from being criminalised for behaviour which can be dealt with more appropriately by other means. 
The future of this role is being reviewed alongside the development of a new residential hub under Project Aspire which is a multi-agency hub based in a children's home that operates a "no wrong door model".  This strives to provide holistic support to young people in care and on the edge of care. The intended outcome of the review is that the YJS partnerships resources is utilised in the most effective way to prevent the significant potential costs of youth crime through early targeted intervention, effective assessment and action delivered through effective partnership working. 
  
 	 
11. Risks to future delivery 
 
The Youth Justice Partnership, like all other public services operates in a context of reduced resource and increasing need within the community it serves.  In addition the levels of relative deprivation, child poverty and complex needs across our city continue to challenge the increasingly scarce resources available from each of the statutory partners that come together to deliver our Youth Justice Partnership. 
The principal concern for future YJS delivery therefore remains a further reduction in revenue alongside an increase in need and complexity and hardship faced by the children, young people, families and communities with whom we work.  As the pressure on individual services increases, so does the difficulty in balancing their direct work and their contribution to the work of the YJS.  Whilst we remain confident that the best way to deliver services to young people in the criminal justice system is through the YJS partnership, the context set out above present significant risk to future delivery. 
The strategy to mitigate the anticipated further funding reductions will be through a combination of exploring other funding options and bids for existing and new money through local and national initiative around crime and violence prevention and reduction, developing more efficient ways of working, exploring opportunities for joint working and partnerships with other agencies across the county and undertaking reviews of delivery arrangements. 
The service and management board will also strive to ensure that the services it funds, and provides, are services that should be funded by the YJS and not front line local authority services that should be funded by other means. 
The increase in our first-time entrants led to the development and success of the YOP which has supported the reduction in first time entrants, but in order to sustain this we will need to continue to work collaboratively with all partners.  This includes liaison and diversion services, early help and prevention services, and they need to commit their support to the YOP process. 
Sheffield YJS is a low secure remand and custody area and on the whole our relationship with the court is very good.  The courts have confidence in our assessments and will always consider every option we propose before remanding a young person or sending a young person to prison. 
 
We have continued to invest in systems, processes and interventions which reduce the need for remand or custody before, during and after sentence. This includes putting in place intelligence and research led strength based desistance and needs analysis, contextual safeguarding approaches, innovative and creative accommodation provision, enhanced levels of supervision, support and surveillance, individualised remand and ISS packages, appropriate use of compliance panels and enforcement processes, increased restorative justice practice and interventions, and developing closer links and contributing to local authority decision makers around access to suitable alternative accommodation to a custodial sentence. 
 
However, as Sheffield comes from reducing remand and custody baseline the central funding towards the costs of secure placements has significantly reduced and a small increase in remands would severely threaten our existing financial and personnel resource.   
 
We have continued to maintain the system and process for reporting and reviewing practice with regard to Community Safety and Public Protection Incidents to the YJS Management Board and to key senior managers within the local authority. 
 
Any learning from critical/serious incidents is reviewed by the service, management board and senior management and is entered onto the YJS Continuous Service Improvement Plan, and shared with staff to improve practice. 
 
           The YJS Continuous Service Improvement Plan also includes learning and actions from HMIP Inspection reports, thematic reviews, local and national audits and compliance with legislative changes. Progress with regard to identified actions within the plan is reviewed on a monthly basis by the YJS management team. 
 
Following the outcome from our recent HMIP Inspection in May 2019 we will be "investing" in improvements to ensure that the organisation maintains its 'Outstanding' features, and moves from Good to Outstanding across the 3 domains particularly in terms of Governance and Leadership, Partnerships and Services and Information and Facilities. 
 
This will be a continuous process which will be regularly reviewed, reported on and monitored at an operational, strategic and management board level. The process will be supported by intelligence, research and qualitative and quantitative data, and underpinned by an increasing use of young people contribution to inform service delivery by an increased investment in participatory and interaction based tools.  This will include social media so that learning from young people's experience of accessing the YJS is consistently incorporated into service development and improvement.  
 	 
12. Priorities for 2019-2021 
 
Board members, partners and staff are committed to working together to improve the outcomes for young people involved in the criminal justice system using a 'child first' approach. 
 
The following priorities and performance measures follow consultation with Youth Justice Service staff, and have been agreed by the Youth Justice Management Board.  They have links with relevant plans from other partnerships, such as: 
• Sheffield Community Safety Partnership Plan 2018-20 
• South Yorkshire Police and Crime Plan 2017-21 
• Sheffield Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2019-24 
• Youth Justice Board Business Plan 2019-20 
 
We will achieve the priorities set out below with the full and active engagement of the wide range of partners and staff within the Youth Justice Service.   
 
Progress against the priorities will be monitored at the Youth Justice Management Board and will be reported to other partnerships across Sheffield and South Yorkshire.   
 
The Management Board will offer challenge, expertise and advocacy to support the Youth Justice Service in meeting its priorities. 
 
 
 
 	 

Priority 
 Why is this important? 
 	What will we do? 	How will we know we 
	 	are making a 
difference? Preventing young people getting involved in crime 127 young people entered the youth justice system for the first time in 2018/19 which is a 33% reduction on the previous year and this trajectory needs to continue. 
 
Preventing a young person's first crime could potentially prevent dozens of crimes over their lives, preventing harm to victims and saving the individual the stigma of being in the criminal justice system. 
 
 We will work with the 
Community Youth 
Teams and South Yorkshire Police to develop the Out of Court disposal process to divert more young people from a criminal justice outcome through the use of No Formal Outcome. 
 
Community Youth Teams will continue prevention work with young people at risk of entering the criminal justice arena. 
 
We will develop better working relationships with council, community and universal services that can offer the positive activities and opportunities that support young people away from offending lifestyles. 
 
 Our target is to reduce the number of first-time 
entrants by a further 5% 
 
Young people will get their needs appropriately assessed, and will be diverted away from the criminal justice system where possible.  
 
The OOCD model will continue to be monitored and 
evaluated by the Youth Justice Service 
Management Board. 
 
We will also monitor and report on: 
• The number of 
referrals to youth crime prevention services. 
• The number referred for OOCD and diverted from criminal justice outcomes. 
• Engagement in and completions of preventative programmes. Reducing the use of custody Custody, including periods spent on remand, is the worst outcome for the young person, seriously disrupting their education and relationships. It should only be used as a last resort. 
 
9 young people We will continue to develop and monitor closely our alternatives to custody, such as Bail or YROs with Intensive 
Supervision and Surveillance (ISS) requirements, so that sentencers can be confident in choosing these. 
 Our target is to continue to reduce the overall number of custodial sentences and remands.  
 
The indicator is the rate of young people receiving custodial sentences per 1000 youth population. The current rate is 0.18% 
Priority 
 Why is this important? 
 What will we do? 
 How will we know we are making a difference? received a custodial sentence in 2018/19 and the service saw an increase of 36% to 1042 in nights young people spent on remand. 
 
 We will seek to develop a placement with a Remand Foster carer as an alternative to custody and police cells. 
 
We will continue to use the BAME action plan to monitor and address the over representation of BAME young people receiving custodial sentences. per 1000 of the youth population. The total number of custodial sentences (9) accounts for 1.68% of young people worked with by the YJS in 2018/19. 
 
We will also monitor and report on: 
• The proportion of court sentences that result in custody 
• The proportion of bail decisions that 
result in remand 
• The number of new remands, repeat remands and total remand bed nights 
• The number of ISS programmes commenced 
• Development of our resource of Remand Foster placements 
• The number of young people kept in custody at the police station, or placed in overnight foster care, prior to court. 
• Disproportionality of BAME young people on remand and receiving custodial sentences. Reducing reoffending Stopping a young person from offending again, or at least diverting them so that they offend less often or less seriously, reduces harm to victims. 
 
Of those with a youth We will continue to monitor the groups and individuals who are most likely to reoffend.  We will ensure that our assessments promote and identify desistance factors, and are reviewed and delivered Our target is to maintain the low rate for the proportion of young people reoffending within 12 months. 
 
We will also monitor and report on: 
? How the factors that 
Priority 
 	Why is this important? 	What will we do? 
 	 How will we know we are making a difference? justice disposal in 2014/15, 30.3% reoffended within 12 months, with on average just over 3 recorded further offences. 
 
This is the lowest in 6 years and lower than the core city average of 39.4% and the national average of 38%. in a timely manner. 
 
We will continue to develop our whole family approach in recognition of the risk and protective factors that contribute to reducing re-offending, including the impact of domestic abuse and other trauma. 
 
We will promote ROTL to support successful rehabilitation.  
 
We will develop our interventions to be evidence-based, inclusive, and offer greater opportunity to support desistance for young people, including through exit strategies & support with transitions. Following the principal of 'explain or reform' (Lammy 2017) we will review our 
implementation of the BAME disproportionality action plan. 
 
We will continue to monitor outcomes for BAME young people and report to the partnership board. 
 
We will endeavour to divert BAME first time entrants through No Formal Action where appropriate. 
 lead to a likelihood of reoffending change throughout the period of supervision and how we respond 
to this 
? The proportion of young people in stable and suitable housing and sufficient ETE especially Children in Care and Care leavers. 
 	Reduce 	Young people from 
Disproportionality. BAME backgrounds are overrepresented in the criminal justice arena nationally and Sheffield is no exception. In 
2018/19 40.1% of young people receiving one or more disposal were from BAME backgrounds where the number of BAME people in the school census was 35.7%. 
 
Moreover BAME young people represented 55% of the custodial sentences in 2018/19 demonstrating that not • Our target is to reduce level of 
disproportionality for BAME young people 
in both FTE and higher tariff sentences. 
• We will demonstrate greater use of community resources to support engagement and desistance for BAME young people in the service. 
• We will monitor and report on; 
• Open 
interventions by 
% ethnicity 
Priority 
 Why is this important? 
 What will we do? 
 How will we know we are making a difference? only are BAME young people more likely to enter the criminal justice system but they are also more likely to receive the highest tariff of sentence. 
 We will challenge our partner agencies to develop their offer to BAME families to promote early intervention and diversion. 
 
We will build links in communities to expand our offer to be more culturally appropriate and increase confidence in the criminal justice system. 
 
We will promote multiagency review if a BAME first time entrant goes straight to custody. 
In partnership with 
Probation and CRC we will further develop the Sheffield Strategy to 
Keep Care Experienced 
Young People Out of Trouble to incorporate arrangements for care experienced young adults. 
 
In partnership with South Yorkshire Police and Project Aspire we will review the Children in Care Police Officer role to ensure the resource is utilised in the most effective way. 
 
We will endeavour to divert care experienced  first time entrants through No Formal Action where appropriate. • Statutory interventions by 
% ethnicity 
• Non statutory interventions by 
% ethnicity 
• Custody bed nights by % 
ethnicity 
• FTE by % ethnicity 
• FTE to court by % ethnicity 
• FTE to custody by % ethnicity. 
• Breach action by % ethnicity. 
 
 Children in Care (CiC) Because of their disrupted lives, children in care are more likely to get involved in offending, but there is evidence they are also criminalised unnecessarily. 24 CiC young people received youth justice disposals in 2018/19; 2 of these were custodial sentences. 
 
Although the number continues to reduce it still represents an over representation from this cohort of young people. 
 
50% of the young people in youth custody have had care experience. 
 
25% of the number of Our target is to further reduce the number of CiC young people receiving youth justice disposals by 5%.  
 
We will also monitor and report on: 
• The number of CiC young people entering the youth 
justice system 
• The number of CiC young people on remand and in custody. 
Priority 
 Why is this important? 
 What will we do? 
 How will we know we are making a difference? people in adult custody 
have had care experience.  
 Engagement and 
Participation Young people are in the best position to inform the service of what they need, and what we need to do to meet those needs. 
 
Young people need to be listened to, their voices need to be heard and their opinions valued. 
 We will work with 
Sheffield Futures Young Advisors to develop a strategy to effectively collate the views of young people and use this to improve the effectiveness of the service. 
 
We will increase the use of self-assessment and parent self-assessment at review and end of orders and harvest the information relating to the service. 
 
We will develop an action plan around the areas where young people who are consulted state that we can do better. We will develop a strategy for engagement and participation and report to the board on progress. 
 
We will report on our findings both from selfassessments and from additional participation activities. 
 
Agreed actions from the above will be monitored through the service improvement plan and through reporting to the board. 
 Child Criminal Exploitation There is growing national recognition that young people are being drawn into offending by adults who profit by their involvement and that in 
addition to criminalisation this places them at serious risk of being victim and/or perpetrator of serious youth violence. 
 
Those profiting from the exploitation target vulnerable young people and use sophisticated grooming methods such that in Develop expertise across the service in identifying signs of exploitation and effectively intervening to divert those at risk. 
 
Establish a baseline of young people in the Youth Justice Service mapped to an organised crime group and another for those assessed as at risk of exploitation through serious organised crime as measured by being open to the Criminal Exploitation Team. Our target is to reduce the number of young people in the Youth Justice Service who are criminally exploited. 
 
We will monitor; 
 
• Reoffending in young people mapped to an organised crime group. 
• Reoffending in young people assessed as at risk of exploitation. 
• Use of the National 
Referral Mechanism Priority 
 Why is this important? 
 What will we do? 
 How will we know we are making a difference? many cases the young people do not see themselves as victims. 
 
Sheffield's partnership approach to dealing with the above issues is Operation Fortify and closely linked to this is the Criminal Exploitation Team which consists of staff and managers from social care, YJS, CYT and MAST. This service 
began in October 2018 and is active in its development of practice in which the Youth Justice Service plays an important part. 
 
The Youth Justice Service will work collaboratively on this priority with the Criminal 
Exploitation Team and 
Operation Fortify In partnership with the 
Criminal Exploitation Team develop resources for intervening with young people and families at risk of exploitation and those involved in serious organised crime. 
 
Train staff and increase use of the National Referral Mechanism. 
 
In partnership with 
MAST and CYT develop resources to educate young people and families and increase 
resilience to exploitation.  
The priority areas for increasing use of education, training and employment and also for promoting good case management that were included in the last plan, whilst not identified as targets this year, remain high priorities and we continue to strive to maintain high standards in these areas. 
The staff group identified that they would like the service to better promote the work it does and the successes it has. This will be an additional goal for the coming year. 
 
 
 	 
13. Positive comments and case studies 
 
 
 
 "If it wasn't for my case manager's help and support I wouldn't be here now..... I have been out of trouble for 2 years, but before that had been getting into trouble 
 and mixing with the wrong people and he helped me to get on the right path.........I am so grateful to him and appreciate everything he has done for me as it has 
 
turned my life around......I wish everyone could have someone like him to help 
 them". 
 (Young person who came in to Star House after a period of 2 years and wanted to tell us what a difference it had made to her as she felt she now has a future to look 
 forward to). 
  
Comment from CLG Appropriate Adult Service to SLT Workers 
"I'm writing to thank you both for your extremely valuable and greatly appreciated contribution to the preparatory training of volunteer appropriate adults over the past year.  All the sessions you delivered were very well received and this was reflected in the feedback of our learners.  Many of them stated how thought provoking it was, and what they had learned could prove to be invaluable whilst volunteering as an AA to support vulnerable people in police custody, many of whom we know, have significant communication difficulties as well as it being useful in other aspects of their lives generally.  We hope you'll be able and willing to continue having an input so others will also be able to benefit from your considerable expertise and experience". 
SEND/SLT Case Study  
 
 "M", a 15-year-old male, lived at home with his Mother, Grandmother and four younger siblings. 
M has some mild neurodevelopmental difficulties and a diagnosis of Developmental Coordination Disorder (Dyspraxia).  M was seen for an appointment at The Ryegate 
Children's Centre in 2013.  He attended for a Social Communication Disorders (SCD) Assessment as his Mum had requested further investigations into a possible diagnosis of Asperger's Syndrome.  Based on M's presentation on the day and available information from the past it was felt that M presented with mild social communication difficulties but he did not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of Asperger's Syndrome. 
 
M experienced periods of neglect in his early years and also witnessed domestic abuse within the family home.  He attends mainstream education and has had no school exclusions or history of substance misuse.   It was reported that M has no history of head injuries, hearing or visual difficulties. 
 
M was sentenced to a 9 month Referral Order  
 
SLT Assessment 
At the start of his Referral Order, M's caseworkers completed a Speech and Language 
Therapy (SLT) screening form, which highlighted social skills as an area of concern.  The SLT met with M's caseworkers and discussed his case and current concerns.  The SLT then saw M for three assessment sessions, which involved taking a case history with M's Mum, finding out M's perception of his own communication strengths and difficulties and formal and informal assessment activities. 
M's language skills were found to be in the average or above average range on formal testing, however at times he struggled to express his ideas and give explanations. 
 
M demonstrated strengths in his ability to: 
• remember and understand spoken instructions and longer pieces of spoken information 
• formulate spoken sentences and narrative (when provided with visual support) 
• tell the time (digital and analogue) and understand time concepts 
• understand vocabulary 
• verbal social skills e.g. turn-taking, maintaining the topic of conversation 
• give eye contact 
  
M's communication difficulties impacted on his ability: 
• think flexibly and use his imagination 
• understand non-literal language e.g. problem solving and making deductions, which rely on your ability to 'read between the lines' and 'see the bigger picture' 
• understand and express his emotions effectively and recognise emotions in others ? problem solve 
• form and maintain friendships 
• pick upon non-verbal cues 
 
Intervention The SLT wrote a report explaining M's strengths and difficulties and distributed this to his parents, caseworkers, school and the other professionals working with him.  The SLT also suggested some strategies to support M's communication difficulties. 
M received 8 sessions working with one of his YJS Case Officers and the SLT. The focus of the sessions was to develop M's understanding and awareness of: 
 
• adolescence and puberty               
• relationships                                   
• victim awareness  
• being sexual in a safe way 
 
The SLT and M worked together to create an advice booklet which lists what would be considered to be safe/ok vs not safe/ok in a relationship. 
Outcomes 
M's caseworker said: 
"When we initially met M we were aware that he was an intelligent young man, who was achieving good grades in school however, at a personal and social level M appeared to be immature for his age. When speaking with M about the offence and his life in general it was obvious that he did not fully understand others' emotions, nor was he able to always convey his own emotions. 
 
As the case was due to sexually harmful behaviour we had to cover some very in depth and personal work with M.  It was imperative that we gauged the wording and the work that we were planning at a level that M would be able to understand. 
 
The SLT used a lot of visual support e.g. cartoons and story/emotions boards to help M recall and talk about what happened during the offence. I led on the work and The SLT suggested ideas on how it could best be adapted for M.  The SLT also observed how M responded verbally and non-verbally during the work. 
 
This was really good example of joint working between two agencies. I felt that the advice from SLT benefited how I could tailor a YJS intervention to meet M's needs and learning style". 
M has now finished his Order and is awaiting a review appointment at The Ryegate 
Children's Centre for further investigation into a diagnosis of an Autism Spectrum Disorder, following his involvement with the YJS over the last 9 months.  The YJS SLT will be part of this assessment process. 
Case study:  Accommodation 
 
E was 18 years old when he came into Roundabout's Resettlement Service after he had been evicted by another provider. He had been entrenched in gang culture and has previous drug related offences. Sheffield YJS and Social Services approached Roundabout to see if we could house E as a matter of urgency. He was currently staying with family in an overcrowded house which led him spending more and more time on the streets. A Keyworker was quickly identified due to a previous working relationship with E whilst in another role with the YJS. A meeting was arranged on the same day of the referral. The Keyworker met with E and his YJS Officer to discuss his needs and to formulate a plan of action. We identified an ideal property in an area close to his support network (family) and also away from any potential conflict/danger zones. 
He moved into the property soon after and cooperative working began between 
Roundabout, YJS and the Leaving Care Team to support E with his aims to withdraw from offending behaviour and work toward gaining his own Council tenancy and living independently.  
E engaged well with all support and made rapid progress with his independent living skills. This was helped greatly by the wrap around support he received from all professionals involved working very closely with him and each other to ensure he got all of the support he required. After around five months we had a discussion with E and the decision was made to sign him up to the Council Housing Register. We put him forward for priority status to enable him to bid on properties in his selected areas. Within a month a property had been identified and a successful bid was made. We began work with E to prepare the property by painting it with him and accessing his Setting Up Home grant to carpet and furnish it. E moved in within three weeks after all the work was completed and remains there to this day. He still keeps in touch and will sometimes ask for advice when he needs it. He said that he is "Thankful for the solid base Roundabout provided for me that enabled me to relax enough to be able to work on myself" and the targets he had. 
Case Study - Education 
 
Background 
J received a 9 month Referral order for offences of Assault and Theft.  J is a looked after young person that has had many missing episodes and rarely attended school. When he did attend he was excluded many times which resulted in a permanent exclusion.  
J was placed in care between 2007 and 2017 mainly with foster carers but also in children's homes.  
J returned to the family home on 2017 following the breakdown of his foster placement and when placed in children's homes he regularly went missing and was often sleeping rough.  
With support from social care the placement back with mum proved successful despite the level of poverty the family experienced.  
ETE Intervention 
When the YJS Education Worker first met J, after his GCSE exams, as he had been allowed to take Maths and English, he had not received his results and was too nervous to go into school to enquire about them.   The YJS Education Worker contacted school for him and he was pleased to discover that he had attained: 
Grade 3 Maths 
Grade 2 English Language 
Grade 1 English Literature. 
J was pleased with his results especially the maths qualification which is equivalent to a D. Since J had not attended school very much these results are not a true reflection of his ability.  
J had not had any Information and Guidance and therefore did not have any post 16 education or training in place.  
J was very anxious at his initial meeting with the Education Worker, he appeared nervous and made little eye contact. He was not sure what area of work he wanted to do but had decided he wanted a job and not training. His school experience had put him off being in a classroom setting. 
J showed interest in construction/warehousing and discussed getting a CSCS Card. He was worried about coping with a classroom situation to gain the card.  He was also concerned about his sleep pattern as he was going to bed very late and not getting up until mid-day.  This was an issue in terms of attending training or employment. 
The Education Worker decided to tackle the issues of his reluctance to be in a classroom by trying to build up his confidence in this area.  J agreed to attend 1-1 sessions to complete an AQA Qualification in Employability Level 1. Within this qualification he worked with the Education Officer to create a CV, started to think about attending an interview, applying for jobs and thinking about what qualities an employer would be looking for.  
After this work was successfully completed the Education Worker made contact with a warehouse company called GB EYE.  The company agreed to take him on for work experience for three afternoons per week.  This was to accommodate his poor sleep pattern.  It was agreed that after a set amount of time the start time would be adjusted to get J in to a better routine of getting up earlier.  
J was supported throughout this process by the Education Worker taking him to visit the warehouse to meet the employer, purchasing safety boots and a high viz vest.  The Education Worker ensured he had a bus pass so that he could get there, and he was also accompanied by a YJS Support Worker on the bus for the first week.    
The placement proved successful and after a few weeks the employer agreed to keep him on. The YJS was able to pay him £20 per day from funds from a work experience pilot negotiated with another department of the local authority.  This enabled J to get a sense of being in paid employment and with the support around him his confidence grew and he started attending full days.   
J attended the work placement for 5 months until his order finished and he was then referred onto the Apollo Project. 
Through his positive experience of employment, a CV with work history, and a glowing reference from GB Eye, J will be able to progress into fulltime paid employment in the future.   
Case Study - Substance Misuse 
 
D came to the YJS on a Youth Conditional Caution following an incident where he had overdosed misusing Xanax and needed hospitalisation.  Whilst receiving treatment he assaulted a nurse, breaking her ribs.  He had no memory of the incident so found it hard to identify with victim, empathise or understand his behaviour.  During assessment with D the 
Substance Misuse Worker explored D's personal experiences of using drugs, and motivators to use.  It was disclosed that D had been misusing Xanax and supplying other drugs for personal use from the Dark Web, this had led to greater experimentation and levels of use overall.  
D initially obtained Xanax as self-medication for his anxiety, which was so severe it had resulted in significant social avoidance and loss of employment. 
D engaged with the psychologist from CAMHS and travels with Mum or Dad. 
D's Xanax use had become dependent and his behaviour, and personality, changed with higher dose of use. D discontinued his use a few months ago and went through physical and mental withdrawal, so the referral to Substance Misuse was with a goal for support and not to relapse back into use.  He was assessed as having a low risk of relapse. 
The Substance Misuse Worker did have concerns over his current drug use - recreational use of cannabis and LSD, also the perceived effect on his mental health and a longer term impact on anxiety. 
D considered himself an experienced user who promotes harm reduction in his use though he was open to learning more and checking his facts.  This had to be delivered to suit his desire to find out things to broaden an already good understanding if this was to have any impact on his personal harm reduction strategies.  
D had been someone for whom the drug taking experience was novel and fascinating - from point of sale, doing research on new drugs, finding new marketplaces to buy them and new technologies.  He had built a strong identity as a drug user.  
Attitudes to drug use in the family had been largely pro - Dad accepting of his experimentation with drugs.  D had used with family, which added to his view drug use is normal and acceptable.   
Other Influences on and around D - a desire to experience being in an altered state and a big gamer so he liked living in another reality.  Friendships - peer preferences for other YP, and adults (in family), who misuse or experiment with drugs.  
Support offered 
The Substance Misuse Worker offered: 
 
• An open space to discuss the personal impact of Xanax abuse on D, and his family.  
• Enhanced offer of drugs education around LSD, cannabis and Xanax, and the impact on brain, emotions and behaviour.  Considering why D felt and acted as he did and what maybe happen if he was to use again. 
• Tracing history, culture and social features of using different substances. 
• Engaging discussion to put across personally important  harm reduction messages. 
• Support to understand what different drug overdoses were, risk of harm and practical things to do or observe in how to prevent one. 
• The opportunity to talk over and check issues of legality in drug use and risky practice. 
 
The Substance Misuse Worker worked through perceived attitude towards victim based on effects of drug use.  D has used substances which has significant impact on memory and emotional processing so finds it hard to be able to explain why he offended or what he was feeling at time, although he was encouraged to develop a sense of personal responsibility around his choice to get in that state. 
The Substance Misuse Worker intervened on issues of appropriateness, boundaries from family and pro social attitudes towards controlled substances.  Also disclosures D made about being in possession of an offensive weapon.  The Substance Misuse Worker discussed this with the family and raised this as a safeguarding issue, consulted with social care and investigated issues further. 
Realistic goals for change were explored and the desire to control drug use, rather than pursue abstinence.  D was supported to put together practical suggestions and ideas that would help him keep perspective on his use, and to be able to effectively monitor that so he is not dependent or loses sight over what is low risk use. 
Work was completed on further exploration of social anxiety - causes and treatment, and D was encouraged to explore self-confidence, self-esteem and positive identity, in course of intervention.  This was so he felt like he had coping skills to reduce his anxiety that were not reliant or exclusive of using drugs.  
D was encouraged to think more about where he was getting information on drugs from, and limitations and drawbacks if that needed addressing.  He was only using drug user forums and buying his own drug testing purity kits, and was relying on this to keep safe.  
The work also included unpicking issues posed by new technologies, and buying and selling of drugs, and risks and benefits of buying drugs in these ways. 
Outcomes 
D grew in social confidence and communication skills improved, which was observed by his case manager, once he felt heard and understood. 
 
D had positive experience of the Substance Misuse service and would recommend using again.  If his drug use ever becomes high risk or problematic he will go back into service and get support he needs. 
D took on board key messages around keeping safe and controlling drug use in future. 
   
 	 

14. Approval and sign off 
 
This plan has been approved by the following partners: 
 
Organisation Name and position Signature Sheffield City Council Victoria Horsefield 
Assistant Director 
Safeguarding and Quality 
Assurance 
People Services Portfolio 
Chair of YJS 
Management Board  Sheffield City Council Carly Speechley 
Director of Children's 
Services 
People Services Portfolio 
  Sheffield City Council Councillor Jackie Drayton 
Cabinet member for Children, Young People and Families  Sheffield NHS Clinical Commissioning Group Sapphire Johnson 
Head of Commissioning - Children, Young People & 
Maternity Portfolio  
  National Probation Service Liz Mills 
Head of National 
Probation Service South 
Yorkshire (Sheffield and 
Barnsley)  South Yorkshire Police Delphine Waring 
Superintendent for 
Neighbourhoods and 
Partnerships, Sheffield    




2 
 

2 
 





Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

2 
 

2 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

2 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

9 
 

9 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

9 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 
 

2 
 

2 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 
 

2 
 













9-2021 

9-2021 





9-2021 















Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

44 
 

44 
 

Youth Justice Plan 2019-2021 	

44 
 

