
				               	
                                                                                                                    




Pembrokeshire Youth Justice Team

Youth Justice Business Plan 2019/20















    
                
	

	

Pembrokeshire Youth Justice Team
Youth Justice Plan 2019/20

Content and Structure

In keeping with the document entitled 'Youth Justice Plans: YJB Practice Note for Youth Offending Partnerships May 2019' this plan contains the following sections;
1. Introduction
2. Structure and Governance
3. Resourcing and Value for Money
4. Partnership Arrangements
5. Risks to Future Delivery against the youth justice outcome measures

Financial information and partnership resource contributions are submitted at the rear of this document following a detailed action plan which will also incorporate key themes including how the service will comply with the following required criteria;
. 
- The service demonstrates a Child First ethos and practice. 
- Partner agencies will work together to improve outcomes for children. 

- The needs of your cohort have been assessed to inform delivery decisions. 

- Local priorities have been identified and planned how these are to be met. 

- Services are measuring and reporting on impact. 

- Risks to delivery are identified, being responded to and mitigated against. 


1 Introduction


Major in-year changes to governance or service delivery

There has been no significant changes to the governance arrangements. Temporary managerial arrangements were in place to cover maternity leave for the Operational Manager which included the Senior Practitioner post taking on additional tasks. Further temporary and recruitment arrangements were initiated when the Senior Practitioner post holder pursued another career opportunity. The VLO post also became vacant and again temporary arrangements and a recruitment exercise were conducted.

The partnership's response to inspection reports published in the previous 12 months

The service has responded to recent HMIP Inspection Reports which have highlighted shortcomings in the assessment of young people who receive an Out of Court (OOC) Disposal across a number of YOTs where, like Pembrokeshire, we take a wider cohort for Community Resolutions and not just those who receive Cautions and Conditional Cautions. To this end we have tightened up on local practices and procedures and adjusted our Risk & Vulnerability Management procedures. However given continued concerns we feel it is prudent to have a comprehensive review which this plan will address.

Review of Last Year's Plan

Regarding key highlights over the previous year; we have successfully migrated to CACI Childview as our Management Information System. This has taken a number of months during the autumn/winter, including data transfer and extensive staff training. The Local Authority fully supported this major infrastructure change. This has brought about a vast improvement in our access to and use of data and our ability to identify and respond to the dynamics of the cohort of young people we work with.

We have also made progress towards a Trauma Recovery Model (TRM) with all key staff being trained in the approach. We are now in a strong place to take the next step towards implementing the Enhanced Case Management (ECM) approach which uses TRM as its foundation. The next steps will be reflected in this plan for 2019-20. 

We continue to monitor 'young person's voice' through independent interviews and the progress of Looked After Children within the wider cohort. We need to focus on developing reward activities, the two designated leads are no longer in post so this work was not completed.

The development of a replacement (YJB) CSPPI process has taken longer than anticipated due to a range of discussions between the various partners, including 4 Local Authorities and 2 Health Boards. The regional Safeguarding Children's Board (CYSUR) has passed drafts through various sub-groups and a final draft will be submitted for approval July 2019. 

Improvements have been made to both Prevention & Anti-Social Behaviour pathways. However a definite 'hot-spot' has emerged in Haverfordwest and steps are being taken to address this, which will be reflected in this 2019-20 plan.

The Service Manager has engaged with the 3rd sector and there are ongoing discussions around former Families First funding (now Children & Communities Grant) where money is available to address ASB and Prevention projects.

Aside from responding to HMIP recommendations related to OOCD more needs to be done and we have made little progress against improving the QA process and reviewing policies and procedures. This is entirely down to a temporary reduction in management capacity which became acute from February to May 2019 as outlined above. We have recruited a new Senior Practitioner from another YOT and the Operational Manager has returned from maternity leave.

      








Glossary of Terms

ACEs			Adverse Childhood Experiences (Public Health Wales)
ACPO			Association of Chief Police Officers
APB			Area Planning Board
ASB			Anti-Social Behaviour
CAMHS		Child & Adolescent Mental Health Services
CCATS		Childcare Assessment Team
CSPPI                     Critical Safeguarding & Public Protection Incidents
CPB			Corporate Parenting Board
CPS			Crown Prosecution Service
CSP			Community Safety Partnership
CYPE			Children and Young People's Executive
CYSUR                    Regional Safeguarding Childrens Board
CYT			Community Youth Team
EMHN			Emotional Health Nurse
ETE			Education, Training and Employment
ESF			European Social Fund
EWC			Education Workforce Council
HMCTS		Her Majesty's Court & Tribunal Service
HMIP			Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation
IOM			Integrated Offender Management
LCJB			Local Criminal Justice Board
LMB                         Local Management Board
LOG                         Local Operational Group (CYSUR)
MAPPA SMB		Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements Strategic 						Management Board
MIS			Management Information System
MoJ			Ministry of Justice
NPT			Neighbourhood Police Teams
OOCD		Out of Court Disposals
OPCC			Office of Police & Crime Commissioner
Ops Manager	Operational Manager
PCC			Pembrokeshire County Council
PLC			Pembrokeshire Learning Centre
PO                           Probation Officer
PPE			Promoting Positive Engagement for Young People
PSR			Pre-Sentence Report
QA			Quality Assurance
RMP			Risk Management Plan
ROSH/ROH		Risk of Serious Harm/Risk of Harm
SM                           Service Manager
SP			Senior Practitioner
S&WP                      Safety & Wellbeing Plan
TYT   			Targeted Youth Team 
TRM			Trauma Recovery Model
VLO			Victim Liaison Officer	
YEPF                        Youth Engagement Progression Framework
YISP			Youth Inclusion and Support Panel
YJB			Youth Justice Board
YJMIS			Youth Justice Management Information System
YJT			Youth Justice Team
2 
Structure and Governance

The Director of Children and Schools chairs the Local Management Board which oversees the work and performance of the Youth Justice Team. The Director of Social Care, the Head of Childrens Services and the area Chief Inspector for Partnerships (Dyfed Powys Police) and the Head of Specialist CAMHS are all board members, as well as a Senior Youth Magistrate. Therefor there are strong links with safeguarding and public protection at Local Management Board level and robust professional challenge and support when required.

The YJT sits within Pembrokeshire Youth (an integrated youth and youth justice service since 2014). Pembrokeshire Youth is embedded in the Children and Schools Directorate (Education), 353with a single Service Manager for Youth Work and Youth Justice; the day to day Senior Management oversight is exercised by the Head of Performance and Community within the Directorate. 

Corporate Flow Chart (Appendix 1)

In terms of Safeguarding Board representation the Service Manager is the Regional YOT Manager Representative on CYSUR Executive Board and the Policy & Procedures and Child Practice Review Sub-groups. The Deputy Chief Education Officer (Engagement) and the Service Manager are both members of the Local Operational Group which is chaired by the Head of Childrens Services. Therefore there are strong links with safeguarding at a local and also a strategic level.
	
There are strong regional partnership arrangements and YJT is represented through reciprocal arrangements at the Local Criminal Justice Board and MAPPA SMB. Some tasks are shared such as representation at the regional OOCD scrutiny panel which is overseen by the OPPC.

Due to changes in Welsh Government funding the PPE grant has been included within the wider Children & Communities Grant (CCG). This has meant changes in oversight for Welsh Government grant funded projects and the regional Youth Crime Prevention Steering Group has been disbanded, its oversight function has been replaced by a CCG Board at the local level. The former PPE 'pot' has been identified and preserved within the new framework.


3 Resourcing and Value for Money

The YJT grant funding from YJB for 2019/20 is £158,524, this represents a modest cut of £1,507 on the previous year. £160,031.  The local Authority contribution for 2019/20 is £353,810 Police and Crime Commissioner has indicated a grant of £45,000 for the current year.  The Welsh Government contribution through the new CCG (former PPE grant) has had an uplift of £17,000 to specifically resource psychology support for implementation of the Enhanced Case Management model, giving a total of £162,900. Partnership allocations remain static and are given at previous levels; Health (In respect of the YJT CPN and access to generic S-CAMHS is £45,280, and Police funding and in-kind contributions is £54,000; see Table 1). Probation contribute £27,278 as a total of two elements; £22,278 for 2.5 days per week Probation Officer time and a £5,000 cash contribution (see Table 1).

The statutory staffing requirements have been met in accordance with the Crime & Disorder Act (1998); we have a seconded Probation Officer, seconded Police Officer, nominated Health (CAMHS Psychologist) and Education (Behaviour Support Manager) staff of suitable expertise. In addition we have support from the CAMHS Dual Diagnosis (substance misuse & mental health) practitioner and an Emotional Health Nurse which we commission as an additional service. Substance Misuse is provided by an in-house service. We hold the Local Authority budget for our own Social Worker posts who come under Social Services training & development processes. This affords us stability over a secondment approach. We have recently employed a highly experienced Social Worker with a broad background in Corporate Parenting, Safeguarding & YOT work as the Team's Senior Practitioner.

This is a small Youth Justice Team with one worker often being responsible for a delivery function; we recently and successfully recruited when our VLO role became vacant at short notice and another worker covered in the short term. This illustrates that we can be vulnerable to changes in personnel and we work hard to mitigate this by widening the skill base of the staff group as far as possible. Staff members can be involved in a wide range of activities which can be a good use of resources however we must ensure we do not duplicate other complementary services.


4 Partnership Arrangements
 
We are members of the Community Safety Partnership and through these links we have done significant recent work to address Anti-Social Behaviour in Haverfordwest Town Centre. We have strong local and regional partnership arrangements in respect of CYSUR, MAPPA and LCJB. The Service Manager is the regional YOT Manager Representative on CYSUR (the Regional Safeguarding Board) and is a member of the Child Practice Review and Policy & Procedures Sub Groups. The Service Manager is also a member of the Local Operational Group (for safeguarding children) which is chaired by the Head of Children's Services, who also sits on the Youth Justice Management Board. The Ceredigion Service Manager represents us at MAPPA Strategic Board level, Carmarthenshire at LCJB. Regional Service/YOT Managers meet quarterly with OPCC and we collectively report to OPCC chaired scrutiny panel which has an oversight role of all Out of Court Disposals. We are also represented at the Area Planning Board for substance misuse and various related sub-groups by our Youth Support Team Manager who leads for Youth Homelessness & Substance Misuse.

Locally, the YJT is represented on the IOM and MARAC Steering Groups and the regional Out of Court Scrutiny Panel. The Service Manager reports to the Corporate Parenting Board and is a member of the Supporting People and Children & Community Grant Boards.

The Management Board routinely reviews any custody cases that arise and discharges the function of a resettlement panel. Board membership previously included the Head of Housing but this post has been merged with the Head of Adult Care within Social Services Directorate which is also represented on the Management Board. Young people leaving custody receive help from both Social Services & Housing staff in line with the Social Services and Well-Being Act (Wales) 2014 legislation. Wider support is provided by our youth work and youth outreach provision. Our service has recently expanded its support available to young people through Welsh Government uplift of the Youth Support Grant with a specific Youth Homelessness prevention element; we anticipate further development of this work stream which will be led by a new Youth Support Team. Pembrokeshire Youth Justice Team has a strong relationship with the local IOM Team who will continue to monitor and support young people once a Licence has expired as deemed appropriate.

Operationally the YJT attend a range of meetings which involve discussions over any active case including; LAC Reviews; Child Care Planning Meetings & Professionals Meetings; Education Planning Meetings; ASB Problem Solving; Prevention Support Services for Adolescents; Child Protection Conference and MAPPA. Partnership arrangements remain strong with Childcare and Education at all levels. The YJT also host multi agency Risk & Vulnerability management meetings. The Youth Justice Team integrates within the YEPF meeting framework regarding education engagement and attainment. The Service Manager is also a member of the Pupil Referral Unit (Pembrokeshire Learning Centre) Management Committee and enjoys good working relationships with Secondary Head Teachers.

The YJT is actively involved in supporting the Governments "Prevent" agenda, the Operational Manager sits on the county Channel Panel and represents YJT and Pembrokeshire Youth on the Steering group. All practitioners are required to complete the online government prevent training and new members of staff are encouraged to complete the Y-JILS "prevent", specific programme.  The YJT also attends the local Serious Organised Crime Board and has clear understanding of the National Referral Mechanism for suspected people trafficking.  


5 Risks to Future Delivery Against Outcome Measures

First Time Entrants indicator, Reoffending Indicator and Custody rates indicator: 

The Bureau/OOCD panel process continues to maintain a low level of First Time Entrants in comparison with pre-OOCD reporting period. Approximately three quarters of the active caseloads is managed through this process and therefore diverted from Court. The Bureau is primarily funded through Welsh Government. As already mentioned the ring fenced PPE grant has been withdrawn as a stand-alone funding stream and the funding is now within the wider Children & Communities Grant (CCG). Whilst this potentially places Bureau on a less firm footing there is strong local commitment to retain the previous funding levels and we anticipate no change to Bureau funding.

The change from PPE to CCG funding will likewise have no impact on service delivery for Prevention projects, indeed there are greater opportunities for closer collaboration with 3rd sector Youth Service providers who have been receiving money to address ASB in particular communities. The pulling together of resources creates a basis of greater collaborative working, which we anticipate going forward. The key challenge that has recently emerged regarding the need for robust and dynamic prevention services is an increase in offending and anti-social behaviour in Haverfordwest Town Centre. As of the first week in July 2019 the Local Authority has given decisive support to Pembrokeshire Youth/YJT by making available a property in the town centre. With wider support from Police and the community we have,  at very short notice established a 'drop-in' provision for young people within the town centre. We will be developing this facility in the coming weeks and months.

As previously we continue to benefit from funding from the OPCC which has allowed us to extend our 'prevention offer' and the main focus has been in giving more support to tackle potential offending behaviour in a school setting. This funding is only secure for the remainder of the current Commissioners term. However we intend to expand the offer if we are successful in applying to the Home Office Endowment Fund as we feel the project and age range will meet the criteria. If unsuccessful we will explore other funding and partnership opportunities to achieve this.

Pembrokeshire continues to see low numbers of young people entering custody which makes us vulnerable to spikes in our performance data as one young person would signify 100% increase in our custody rate. We continue to offer a robust and bespoke ISS programme for each young person on the cusp of a custodial sentence; due to very low numbers it remains unpractical to maintain a dedicated ISSP team. 

Reoffending remains our biggest challenge in terms of YJB monitoring data. We have seen improvements in neighbouring Welsh YOTs who have access to the ECM pilot but we have not been earmarked for roll-out this year. We feel strongly that we can perform better if we adopt an ECM approach and to this end our CCG Board has agreed to fund the psychology support for the current financial year. At time of writing a psychologist has been identified locally within CAMHS, staff have undertaken the preparatory TRM training and we anticipate becoming fully operational during the summer/early autumn.


Welsh performance Indicators;

ETE:

As a Youth & Youth Justice Service we continue to improve the support we offer young people across a range of settings. NEET performance within the county against YEPF is strong. However we recognise we can do more to support young people in a school setting, particularly where a child is at risk of exclusion. Recent organisational changes have led to better linkage with Education Inclusion services, and the Behaviour Support Manager has recently become a formal link with YJT as part of his duties. We anticipate that we will be in a stronger position to offer interventions more promptly that may prevent some permanent exclusions from being made. We also see opportunities to better integrate our intervention planning around alternative arrangements where these have to be made.

Mental Health: 

We continue to receive support from Specialist CAMHS when required. We recognise that many young people have emotional health needs but otherwise do not have a mental illness and therefore would not meet CAMHS threshold. To support these young people we will continue to commission an Emotional Health Nurse from CAMHS; the post holder works with the most complex young people whilst advising and supporting case managers with less complex cases. CAMHS will provide the post holder with clinical supervision. CAMHS also support our substance misuse staff with the input of a specialist dual diagnosis worker. Due to the strong local partnership between CAMHS and YJT we are confident that we will successfully build on this with the ECM roll-out. Specialist CAMHS are committed to an annual Mental Health training event for Youth Justice Team staff.

Substance Misuse: 

After approximately 12 months of being taken back within YJT the Substance Misuse Team is moving into a new Youth Support Team whose remit will include Substance Misuse and Youth Homelessness (a new requirement from Welsh Government which is fully funded). This has been done due to the level of experience of that team manager with regards to the substance misuse agenda. As an integrated service the top priority will remain support for YJT and interventions for the young people they work with as their first priority. The team also offer a significant amount of prevention work, particularly to schools within the county. We are seeing a very recent increase in solvent abuse which is a concern and an area for improved prevention work. We are also up-skilling school based youth workers to support their work. We do not anticipate any problems with performance against Welsh KPI's. 


Accommodation: 

As stated above the Service Manager represents youth justice at the local Supporting People Steering Group; this is the strategic group which seeks to address unmet need related to housing.  Independent living skills and tenancy support for young people have long been part of a wider menu of services delivered by Community & Outreach Youth Workers within our wider service.  Further to this and as already mentioned we are in the process of establishing a Youth Support Team with e key focus on Youth Homelessness and Substance Misuse. We have also worked with Social Services and Housing colleagues in establishing 2 dedicated posts within the Housing Department, one of which is dedicated to ensuring effective youth support pathways through all relevant services. The Service Manager sits on the steering group for this project. Our main underlying problem is a shortage of one bedroom properties.


Other Local Priorities:

Enhanced Case Management

As above ECM roll-out is an identified service need and we anticipate it making an impact on reoffending. Pembrokeshire has not been included in the funded roll-out but YJB are supportive of us adopting a self-funded approach. To this end we will need to work closely with local partners, including CAMHS and the CCG Board, who will have an additional monitoring role as they are funding this area of work.


Compliance with HMIP Guidance on OOCD Practice
                                
We have previously noted the findings in the HMIP Thematic Report; Out-of-court disposal work in youth offending teams (March 2019). The report highlighted that while YOTs were doing good work overall and there was strong partnership work with Police there could be improvements to both planning and assessment as well as more attention being paid to the views of children. We have since observed YOT Inspection Reports over the past 12 months which have highlighted these or similar issues with OOCD on a number of occasions. In some instances the YOT has been strong on the management of Court Orders but less so on OOCD. 

Previously as a Dyfed Powys region we requested and received an independent evaluation by Aberystwyth University of our (OOCD) Bureau process, and were confident at that time that we were developing our systems and processes to ensure we were delivering a robust and effective service. To evidence this we had a shared regional action plan, however some time has now elapsed since our review. 

Given that HMIP are identifying specific issues around the robustness of assessment and planning where YOTs are taking a wider cohort through their OOCD process (like Pembrokeshire), we feel it is essential to learn from these findings. Our Bureau process now accounts for at least three quarters of all young people receiving an intervention, the majority of whom would not receive a Caution or Conditional Caution and would not be subject to a full ASSET Plus assessment. We recognise that HMIP are flagging the need for YOTs (and in particular YOTs who operate as we do) to ensure that they have robust processes in place to ensure appropriate assessment of risk.

To this end we will review our current process including our assessment tools and documentation and ensure that we are both compliant with HMIP recommendations and best practice.	

Haverfordwest Town Centre

As referenced above, we are seeing a very recent increase in youth related ASB in Haverfordwest Town Centre and we are also beginning to see offences being committed by the same group of young people. Police information indicates that from March to June 2019 29% of officer time in the town has been taken up with youth related issues. At short notice there has been a robust and supportive response from Police, the Local Authority and community. The LA has provided premises for the service to operate a 'Youth Drop-In' during peak times that correlate with the behaviour incidents. The facility has group and 1:1 consultation space and is being staffed predominantly by YJT staff who are targeting a specific cohort for intervention work. We need to develop a wider range of activities and interventions to both address the behaviour of the small core of known offenders as well as provide a range of open access activity that will have an added prevention element for the wider cohort whom associate with them. We have held a seminar on the issues for County Councillors and the Head of Performance and Community has presented at Cabinet, who require a progress report in the autumn.


Substance Misuse - Solvent Abuse
As above, we will continue to develop and deliver substance misuse interventions that are in line with current substance misuse trends. This will include in particular a strong Desistance emphasis for Solvent Abuse, for which a Harm Reduction Approach is deficient due to the lethality of some products. We will also develop staff training to ensure that Solvent Abuse is a Child Protection issue and needs to be approached decisively. This will be a component of PSE and wider substance misuse prevention work during the next year.

Prevention Work in Schools

We have developed our 'Back on Track' programme in previous years as a school based intervention for young people whose behaviour is on the cusp of offending. Pupils are identified in partnership with the school due to them having a high risk of exclusions related to behaviour, which outside of school would in all likelihood lead to Police and Youth Justice involvement. The Dyfed Powys Police & Crime Commissioner has supported the project through his contribution to YJT Prevention work. We feel the project can make an impact but we lack the resources to extend beyond one or two schools at a time. To this end we plan to explore funding opportunities through the Home Office Youth Endowment Fund and/or any other available grants.

Young Person's Voice

We will continue with our programme of obtaining feedback from young people independently of YJT staff through our Children & Young People's Rights Office. The Management Board will receive feedback reports from this process at each meeting. Appropriate summaries will be shared with YJT and supporting staff to provide learning opportunities while protecting the identities of all parties.

We have also recognised the need to better incentivise young people to engage with YJT interventions. The focus can tend towards obtaining compliance and can become over reliant on enforcement or fear of enforcement and the more remote possibility for early revocation for those who are highly compliant. We recognise that genuine engagement is also transactional in nature and that we need to explore with young people ways that would motivate them to engage through recognition and reward. We will be asking CYPRO to also undertake this work on behalf of YJT.

Review Policies & Procedures

As previously mentioned in the overview of the previous year we have had insufficient management capacity to review all policies and procedures in line with last year's plan. We have completed a recruitment exercise and from the 22nd July we will be at full management capacity; this work will commence in the autumn, with completion by end of March 2020.

Staff Training & Development

Through our Pembrokeshire Youth Training Group we will ensure that we continue to respond to general and team specific staff training needs across the Youth sector. YJT staff will continue to be offered access to the Effective Practice Certificate in Youth Justice and where required they will be supported to progress to the Foundation Degree. Staff will also continue to receive role specific training such as AIM/Sexually Harmful Behaviour training for Case Managers of which we maintain a cohort of trained staff.

We will jointly commission training on a regional YOT basis where appropriate. We have also agreed access to ChildView training in neighbouring YOT's (who are in process of adopting this system) for those of our staff who were not in post late last year when we received a comprehensive training package.

Pembrokeshire Youth will also continue with our September 'Training Week' programme which will include an opportunity to refresh safeguarding training and at time of writing we have also requested a Workshop to Raise Awareness of Prevent (WRAP) training session from the provider. We have been able to book 8 places for the service through the Chief Inspector who is the Dyfed Powys Police member of the Management Board, this will take place during the summer.





Kate Evan-Hughes
Chair of Youth Justice Management Board
(Director of Children & Schools)

Youth Justice Team Business Plan Objectives 2019-20


AREAS REQUIRING IMPROVEMENT

Business Development PrioritiesAction to be takenResponsible managerCompletion date

1. Establish Enhanced Case Management process

 


* Commissioning through CCG Board (Completed Spring 2019).
* Recruitment of Psychologist

* Operational Procedures & Clinical Practice in place

* Operational Delivery

* YJB CYMRU support & advisory visit

* Project Evaluation (to Management Board & CCG Board)



SD/AL (CAMHS)

KP/LD (CAMHS)


KP/LD (CAMHS)


SD/YJB


KP/LD


June 2019 (Completed)

August 2019


August 2019


December 2019


March 2020
2. Review OOCD/Bureau process to ensure compliance with HMIP




* Form Task & Finish group with terms of reference; to include (as appropriate to each stage) Op Manager, Snr Practitioner, Police Officer, Practitioner, VLO & Panel Volunteer).

* To review current procedures, assessment framework and documentation and map against practice

* To review key findings from OOCD Scrutiny panel for Pembrokeshire cases (as per feedback from Police & Crime Commissioners Office).

* To review relevant OOCD cases that have been referred into the Risk Management framework and/or identified as inappropriately assessed through the current QA process.

* Undertake 'survey' of good practice identified within YOTs in HMIP reports and relevant YJB reports.

* Where appropriate commission a survey of identified young people by CYPRO to obtain their views on why their needs were not properly identified.

* Make recommendations to Service Manager & Management Board

SD/KP




T&F Group



T&F Group




T&F Group




T&F Group



CYPRO/T&F Group



T&F Group/
SD

September 2019




October 2019



December 2019




December 2019




December 2019



February 2019




March 2019
3. Address ASB & escalating offending within Haverfordwest Town Centre.



* Provide immediate service to target core group in partnership with Police, other LA Departments & Community.

* Develop prevention services in partnership with Community Youth Team & 3rd Sector Partners, including holiday activities aimed at desistance.

* Develop plans for a sustainable partnership model for youth provision in the town centre.

* Review report to LA Cabinet & Management Board with recommendations

* Work with Police to develop clear ASB referral pathway for front-line Police Officers.

SD/AG/LG


SD/AG/LG





SD/LG/KP


SD


KP
July 2019


August 2019





September 2019


October 2019


March 2020
4. Develop Prevention Services to meet emerging need (including focus on substance misuse/solvent abuse issues and linked behaviour)

* Practitioners to receive research time to identify any additional training & resources to meet emerging needs including substance misuse trends and solvent abuse

* Purchase of any new resources/teaching aids & required training booked

* Collaborative meeting with 3rd sector partners to scope opportunities for collaboration in delivery.

* Recommendations from YJT/Substance Misuse/Youth Support Team re; whole service approach to prevention/PSE delivery/staff training.

* New substance misuse prevention package available for delivery to schools and other youth/prevention settings.

* Presentation to Pembrokeshire Association of Primary Head Teachers (PAPH) on YISP/Prevention referral process for young people age 8+ at risk of offending.

DW





DW


DW




DW/SD/team Managers




DW/CP




SD
August 2019





August 2019


September 2019





September 2019




October 2019




March 2020
5. Explore funding opportunities to extend 'Back on Track'
	





* Utilise existing funds to recruit as a temporary measure whilst seeking external funding.

* Application to Home Office Endowment Fund

* If successful complete recruitment & staff training 

* Project roll-out 


* Explore alternative funding streams if above unsuccessful/or limited in scope & duration.

* Explore partnership opportunities with 3rd sector partners e.g. Big Lotter bid to support project and wider prevention agenda.
SD/KP



KP/AG




SD/KP


SD/KP


SD/KP



SD/KP




August 2019



December 2019


March 2020


April 2020


April 2020



Ongoing


6. Young Persons Voice

* Continue programme of independent interviews with young people.

* Provide regular feedback to team meetings to share best practice

* Consultation with Young people to identify recommendations for a recognition and rewards scheme.

* Report findings to LMB on any emerging themes from young people.

* Report to LMB on young people's suggestions and recommendations for a recognition & reward scheme.

SD/RD


RD/KP



SD/RD




SD/RD



SD/RD
March 2019

Ongoing



December 2019




Ongoing



March 2019

7. Review Policies & Procedures 




* Establish Task & Finish Group 

* Complete Policy & Procedure review

* Report to LMB with recommended policy changes

SD

T&F Group


SD
September 2018

March 2018

March 2018

8. Staff Training & Development 

* All YJT staff will remain current with safeguarding training

* All YJT staff will have access to WRAP training

* All YJT staff will have completed Childview training appropriate for their role

* Staff will continue to have role specific training opportunities and benefit from wider service training programme.

SD/Training Group


DW/Police/
Training Group

KP/ER


SD/KP/training Group
September 2019 & Ongoing



September 2019


December 2019


Ongoing





OutcomePerformance IndicatorActivityRef to YJ planCost1. Reduction in first time entrantsNumber of FTE's* Target young people at high risk of offending by developing our range of Prevention interventions, specific focus in Haverfordwest but must be responsive to any emerging need that arises in other communities.

* Expand offer for early identification and prevention intervention within school setting.

* Review OOCD/Bureau process and ensure assessment and planning is fit for purpose.3. Address ASB & escalating offending 
4. Develop Prevention Services to meet emerging need 
5. Explore funding opportunities to extend 'Back on Track'
2. Review OOCD/Bureau process 
6. Young Persons Voice 
£50,0002. Reduction in youth offendingNumber of young people reoffending* Roll-out of Enhanced Case Management (ECM) model across Pembrokeshire.

* Ensure accurate recording/effective use of Re-offending toolkit.

* Closely monitor LAC & vulnerable groups.

* CYPRO team to approach young people for independent feedback on completion of YJT intervention.

* Ops Manager to collate and prepare quarterly report for Management Board, team and case manager meetings.
1. Establish Enhanced Case Management process 
8. Staff Training & Development


6. Young Persons Voice 

£44,5003. Effective public protection and Effective Safeguarding* Ensure staff training remains current and relevant to their role.

* Ensure all staff have access to Childview MIS training and maintain accurate and up to date records.

* Ensure we are active participants across the range of partnerships, including LOG (Safeguarding Board0, MAPPA, IOM & CSP.

* Maintain the Risk & Vulnerability meetings to review relevant cases.

* Service Manager to join regional MAPF group and ensure YOTs are fully embedded in replacement CSPPI framework.

* Review policies & procedures.

* Review OOCD/Bureau process
8. Staff Training & Development













7. Review Policies & Procedures
2. Review OOCD/Bureau process 
4. Access to devolved services for young people in the youth justice systemAccommodation (YJB/WG) outcome measure





ETE (YJB/WG) outcome measure






Substance Misuse(YJB/WG) outcome measure




Mental Health 
* Services will continue to be developed in partnership with Supporting People, Pembrokeshire Youth will be fully involved in re-commissioning housing support services.
* Pembrokeshire Youth will continue to develop the Youth Homelessness function within our Practice Support Team.

* Services are delivered/ developed in partnership with Targeted Youth team (School, College & Outreach) and fully integrated with YEPF framework.

* YJT will benefit from closer working with Behaviour Support Manager within LA who works across all schools.

* Continue to deliver effective in-house Substance Misuse interventions to support YJT Case Management and engage in effective partnership working with CAMHS Dual-diagnosis worker & Drugaid/Barod service. 

* Further develop Substance Misuse prevention programmes to include solvent abuse as a priority.


* Contribution to development Young Person's Emotional Health & Wellbeing Service to include prevention services.

* Current commissioning arrangement with CAMHS to include Psychology support for ECM.





















4. Develop Prevention Services to meet emerging need 




1. Establish Enhanced Case Management process 










£40,000





£24,000



Table 1: Partner contributions to the youth offending partnership pooled budget 2019/2020
 
AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Local authority*£325,380£ 28,430£353,810Police Service£ 54,000£ 54,000National Probation Service£ 22,278£  5,000£ 27,278Health Service£ 45,280£ 45,280Police and crime commissioner**£ 37,200£  7,800£ 45,000Welsh Government£138,740£  7,160£145,900YJB Youth Justice Grant £158,524£  2,874£161,398Other***Total£781,402£ 51,264£832,666
* For multi-authority YOTs, the totality of local authority contributions should be described as one figure.
** Any money from the police and crime commissioner that has been routed through a local crime reduction partnership should be included here.
*** It should be noted that the 'Other' category is for additional funding that the YOT can use for any general youth justice activities. Accordingly, funding such as the YJB Grant for Junior Attendance Centres should not be included as there is an expectation that these streams must be used for the delivery of services as intended, only when this has been achieved can any surplus be reinvested within wider YOT service delivery.



1





