 
 
 
 
 
Somerset  
Youth Offending Services 
 
Youth Justice Plan 
 
April 2019 - March 2020 
 
 
 
  	 
 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
2 Structure and Governance 
 
3 Resources and value for money 
 
4 Partnership arrangements 
 
5 Work with young offenders 
 
6 Service Improvement 
 
7 Risks to delivery 
 
8 Appendix 
 
 
Signature sheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 	INTRODUCTION       
1.1 	SUMMARY OF PERFORMANCE 2018/19 
 
This plan sets out a summary of activities and performance over the previous year and our intentions for the year to come. The first section shows progress against the nationally and locally agreed measures. It also shows more detail of the differences between the male and female offender cohorts that will continue to be reported as part of the measures to better address the needs of female offenders; this is discussed further below. The tables show: 
 
• First time entrants to the Youth Justice System 
The annual number in Somerset continues to decline in accordance with national  
           objectives 
 
• The proportion of female offenders 
This has increased slightly since last year from 12.17% to 14.81%. Our overall number of offenders on current programmes has also increased from 69 last year to 81 as of May 2019 
 
• The reoffending rate in Somerset 
This has continued to decline in accordance with national objectives. Detailed analysis has shown that within this there is actually a higher rate of early reoffending. Whilst action is being taken to seek to reduce this, we are also investigating further to understand what is causing this and whether it is linked with the extremely low use of custody 
 
• The use of custody 
This has remained extremely low in the Somerset area, which is still one of the lowest users of custody in the country. The numbers involved are very small so significant fluctuations in the percentage rate can be expected from time to time, but the overall position is clear 
 
• Engagement in Education, Training and Employment  
Locally this continues to be an area of focussed effort and the available comparison data shows higher engagement rates in Somerset than in the South West region and England, although the absolute figures are declining  
 
• Accommodation suitability at order end 
The level remains very high but there is always the caveat that it is based on a subjective assessment by the case holder 
 
• The offending rate of looked after children in Somerset, as measured by the Department of Education (DfE) indicator has approached the national rate over recent years but we do not have up to date comparison data 
 
• Victim work  
  	Somerset YOS continues to prioritise work with victims using dedicated workers and           focussing on RJ conferences 
  	 

TABLES 
TABLE 1.1A FTES 2015/18 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1.1B GENDER/ETHNICITY OF CURRENT OFFENDER CASES 
 

 
TABLE 1.1C  REOFFENDING 2012/17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1.1D  USE OF CUSTODY 2015/19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1.1E ENGAGEMENT IN ETE 2012/18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Youth Justice Board produce Education comparative data of those young people in supervised education/employment.  This is calculated from the data that is sent quarterly. These results are shown in the table below. It is a slightly different calculation to the data discussed above as it does not include Youth Conditional Cautions. However, as can be seen the performance of Somerset YOS is better than both the South-West average and when compared with whole England data.  We have lower rates of Post 16 young people in full-time education or employment, but far better numbers of our school-age cohort in education. 
 
% Full-time School age Post 16 Overall Somerset 60% 33% 42% South west 30% 26% 27% England 48% 42% 44%   
TABLE 1.1E  SUITABILITY OF ACCOMMODATION 2011/18 
 
 
 
  	 
 
TABLE 1.1F  OFFENDING BY LOOKED AFTER CHILDREN 2011/17  
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
      
 
Please note the percentage for No status on SEND could be an undercount on the graph above, due to high numbers of young people placed in Somerset from other authorities and the data not being readily available. 
 
 
      
 
The range of issues could relate to: 
• unstable accommodation 
• absconding or staying away 
• overcrowding 
• unhealthy or unsafe 
• offending within the family/or other accommodation • living with known offenders 
 
      
 
           
 
 
     
           
 
          
 
1.2 	PROGRESS ON SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 
 
Since the introduction of the Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice (2015), Somerset YOS has continually sought to improve case holder practice and awareness in this area of work and to forge inter-agency links to identify and best support young people with "SEND" 
Somerset YOS engaged with the Youth Justice SEND Project: "Transforming Young Lives", a partnership brought together with DfE funding and support from the YJB and the Ministry of Justice to improve collaboration between Youth Justice, Education and Health providers.  
Somerset YOS applied and was selected by the project to participate in a benchmarking activity to gain greater understanding of how effectively the YOS and its associated partners were supporting young people in the criminal justice system who were assessed as having special educational needs. Somerset YOS met with the project lead and the Somerset SEND Commissioning Manager in June 2017 to complete the Benchmarking exercise and the actions from this were implemented over the next 9 months, when it was agreed by the Project that The Somerset Area Partnership had met improvements in all areas. The project was provided with narrative evidence and case studies to demonstrate progress made.  
These improvements meant that the Area Partnership had reached the standard required to receive the Youth Justice SEND Quality Mark and Quality Lead Status 'Achievement for All', one of only 22 YOS' receiving either this award or Quality Lead status.   
YOS caseloads are refreshed monthly and cross referenced with Somerset SEND data, made available to YOS and SEND Education managers for their review and scrutiny. This information provides the young person status data, i.e. EHCP or SEND Support, plus education and care details.  
We learnt from the 2017 Youth Justice Board reoffending tracker that young people with SEND in Somerset, (or those that were or, who had been looked-after), had a higher rate of reoffending than those without either of these characteristics.   
From the 197 young people on the YJB Somerset 2017 Reoffending Tracker, 53 reoffended, (26.9%).  40% of the 53 young people who had reoffended were young people who were/or had been a looked-after child, and 39% of the 53 young people who had reoffended were young people with SEND).   
We know therefore that, if the young person is CLA and has a SEND status, their risk of reoffending is even higher.   
Through assessment (ASSET+), the YOS gathers information on all open cases regarding education, training and employment which includes information gathering to identify if a young person is relevant to higher level funding to support education, or has a previous/current statement of special educational needs / or more recently, the EHCP. Statements / EHCPs are then used to support understanding of how to work directly with young people as well as provide evidence to support advocacy and challenge where appropriate.  This helps ensure that young people open to the service, can access relevant educational provision.   
Non engagement in education remains a significant factor identified with desistance theory.  
The YOS have access to the SEND bubble which supports better understanding of ongoing SEND reform and best practice and how that fits with the Youth Justice System, securing better outcomes for young people with SEND and working effectively in partnership.    
Somerset YOS' journey to ensure the service continues to make best use of resource and ensure that best outcomes for young people with SEND will remain.   
Moving forward, collaborative work with education leads in Somerset will be enhanced as a high priority and is being supported through redesign and thematic discussions at Board level. 
1.3 	YOUTH OFFENDING TEAM RESTRUCTURING 
 
The Local Authority review of business support and accommodation, referred to in the previous plan, is continuing.  Following the restructure there has been a reduction in business support staff however they remain as dedicated support to the YOS and continue to operate a duty service response.   
 
Over the last six months, a number of YOS locations have changed, with an inevitable impact upon staff performance and morale as things settle down.  To note, over the last year Somerset YOS has seen the following changes: 
 
• a move out of the New Prospects building in Bridgewater to the main County Council office accommodation in Bridgwater with delivery space separately at Block TA, Rollercoaster  
• a move out of Morley House temporary accommodation in Yeovil into South 
Somerset district council office accommodation, co-located with other local authority staff including Childrens Social Care. 
• a move out of Belvedere Road accommodation into SCC County Hall accommodation in Taunton  
• a move out of the YOS HQ Street office to co-locate in either the Shepton Mallet Hub or Glastonbury Library Hub.  The Street office was considered a contribution in kind from Avon and Somerset Police to the value of £8000 pa, running costs were in the region of £20000 pa so it was planned to give up the accommodation prior to being given notice by the police. 
 
It is planned that as part of the continuing property and premises review YOS staff, where possible, will be co-located with other Childrens Services" to enable greater joined up working across the "Families agenda" 
 
1.4      PARTNERSHIP BOARD ACTIVITY 
Through 2018/19 the Somerset Youth Justice Partnership Board met.  At each meeting it received finance and performance reports covering Youth Justice Grant requirements and performance against national indicators. As well as reviewing performance against national measures, the Board received detailed reports upon the accommodation and education/employment status of individual young people engaged with the YOS and acted to support improved engagement.  The Board also received reports and presentations on local and national issues.  
 
The Board approved a revised protocol on joint working arrangements between the YOS and Childrens Social Care.    Work on a further multi agency protocol for Children Looked After to include accommodation providers is commencing now with partners, including Avon and Somerset Constabulary. 
 
The HM Inspectorate of Probation Youth Justice inspection framework was re-presented to the Board in March 2019, including an exercise on partner readiness for HMI Probation inspection.   As part of this and recognising the renewed focus on leadership and governance of the YOS, a revised Terms of Reference document has been produced for discussion and agreement at full board in June 2019.  This includes a move to themed partnership board meetings, beginning with children and young people not receiving their full educational offer.   The interim Head of Virtual School is joining the board to maintain a keen focus on children looked after or previously looked after.   
 
 
	2 	STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE 
 
	2.1 	HEAD OF SERVICE 
 
In Somerset the Head of Prevention and Youth Offending Services and nominated YOS Manager reports to the Deputy Director Childrens Services. The management portfolio now includes the Youth Offending Team, Young Carer assessment and community delivery arrangements, the Front Door (First Response, EDT and Early Help Hub) and prevention services (getset Level 3, Pathway to Independence (P2i) and Team 8). These services between them span a service user age range of approximately 0 to 24 years, plus parents/carers and victims.  
 
Between the YOS manager role and deputy DCS role membership of a range of relevant groups is covered: 
 
• Somerset Youth Justice Partnership Board 
• Somerset Safeguarding Children Board (including sub- groups: Board Quality & Performance and Missing and Child Exploitation 
• Safer Somerset Partnership 
• Somerset Childrens Services' Senior Management Team 
• Somerset Early Help Strategic Board 
• Somerset Complex Cases Panel 
• Somerset Quarterly Performance Review Meetings 
• MAPPA performance board 
 
	2.2 	BOARD STRUCTURE 
 
TABLE 2.2A BOARD STRUCTURE 
 
Julian Wooster Director of Children's Services Chairperson Liz Spencer Head of National Probation Service, Somerset Statutory member Lydia 
Woodward Associate Director of Commissioning Women's and Children's Health (Acting) Statutory member Sharon Baker Chief Inspector, Avon and Somerset Constabulary Statutory member James Clynch Head of YJB - South West and South Central Region  Teresa Harvey Assistant Director, Sedgemoor District Council   Additional member Stuart Brown Chief Executive, Mendip District Council Additional member Emily Walters Interim Head, Virtual School  Additional member Michelle 
Hawkes Public Health Specialist Additional member Simon Williams Youth Court Lead, Her Majesties Court Service Additional member Penny Johnson Senior Business Intelligence Lead, Performance Management and information Team, SCC Additional member Ali Porter Somerset & Hinkley Partnership Manager, Department for Work and Pensions Additional member  Frances Nicholson Cabinet Member for Children and Families Additional member Lise Bird YOS Manager Adviser to Board  
	2.3  	YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN APPROVAL 
 
The annual Youth Justice Plan prepared by the YOS manager is approved by the Board for submission to the YJB. Once approved by the YJB, the plan is presented to the County Council Lead member for Childrens Services for ratification by means of a Key Member Decision. 
 
	3  	RESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY          
 
	3.1 	YOUTH JUSTICE GRANT 
TABLE 3.1A YOUTH JUSTICE GRANT EXPENDITURE 2018/19 
 
YJB YJ GRANT EXPENDITURE   Courts' Services 420,997 Activities costs 12,000 Accommodation 23,026 Overheads 6,215 TOTAL £462,238.00  
 
	3.2 	PARTNER CONTRIBUTIONS TO YOUTH OFFENDING SERVICES 
 
TABLE 3.2A  PARTNER CONTRIBUTIONS 2018/19 
 
AGENCY Staffing Costs Payments in Kind Other 
Delegated funds TOTAL Police 103,077 8,000 10,000 121,077 Police & Crime Commissioner    65,000 65,000 Probation 21,600  10,000 31,600 Health 49,041  0 
 49,041 Local Authority   367,100 375,700 0 742,800 YJB   462,238 462,238 Other (A&S Constabulary) 
Other (NHS CCG ) * 
Other (NHS CCG) **   13,462 40,000 17,000 13,462 
40,000 
17,000 TOTAL  
540,818 383,700 617,700 1,542,218  
*£40,000 NHS CCG funds = £24,000 Speech and Language Therapist, £11,500 0.2 Forensic Psychologist, £4,500 staff training.  No funding confirmed for 2020/21. 
**£17,000 NHS CCG funds = Educational Psychology time.  No funding confirmed 2020/21. 
 
 
TABLE 3.2B  PARTNER SECONDED STAFF 
 
Probation Officer 0.5 FTE Police Officer 0.8 FTE Police Youth Interventions Worker 1 FTE Forensic Psychologist 0.8 FTE LSS Specialist Teacher 140 hours pa Educational Psychology support Withdrawn in 
2019/20  
 
 	 
 
	3.3 	STAFFING AND VOLUNTEER RESOURCE 
 
TABLE 3.3A OPERATIONAL  STAFFING STRUCTURE    

 
 
 
 
	TABLE 3.3B 	STAFFING BY GENDER 
 
Female 19 83% Male 4 17% Other 0   
 
TABLE 3.3C -  STAFFING BY ETHNICITY  
 
White British 97% White Other 3%  
 
 
 
TABLE 3.3D   VOLUNTEERS 
Approximately 64% of volunteers are ages 61 years or above, with only 20% of volunteers in the 20-40 year age bracket. 

 
 
 

 
 
Volunteer occupational backgrounds - The majority of YOS Volunteer occupational backgrounds could be deemed as professional.  The largest proportions being represented from the business community and health communities respectively. Other well represented occupational experience includes social care, prison service and education with a very small number in low paid or unpaid positions.   One volunteer registered as disabled and one volunteer identified as unemployed.   
Duration of work with the YOS - Half of the volunteers have worked for the YOS for 1 year or less, with a quarter of volunteers working for the YOS for ten years or more. 
The Geographical spread of volunteers is relatively even in 3 quadrants of the county, with exception of Mendip, at 20%. 
Volunteers employment status - The Vast majority of volunteers (58%) are retired.  Over a third of volunteers at 38% are employed with 2% showing as unemployed. 

 
In the coming year a priority action for consideration will be to improve the range and representative mix and demography of volunteer support, to reflect the experience and background of children and young people in the youth justice system in Somerset. 
  
	4 	PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS 
 
	4.1 	POLICE 
 
Avon and Somerset Constabulary seconded a 0.8 FTE police officer and a full-time civilian 
Youth Interventions Officer to the YOS. The previously provided accommodation for the YOS main office on the police station site in Street ceased in March 2019.  Seconded police staff have access to the secure police network.  There is an identified senior link officer who is also a member of the Partnership Board, as well as other senior officers who link for specific purposes.  The Police also contribute to the Youth Justice pooled budget. 
 
 
	4.2 	PROBATION 
 
The National Probation Service allocation to Somerset has decreased from 1.5 FTE in  
2017/18 to 0.5 in the later part of 2018/19, this arrangement remains in place for 2019/20.  The post links with a local NPS manager for liaison and support purposes whilst a senior NPS manager sits on the Partnership Board. The NPS also contributes the nationally agreed amount to the Youth Justice Pooled budget. 
	4.3 	CHILDRENS SOCIAL CARE 
 
YOS has access to a Children's Social Care qualified Social Worker, who specialises in Harmful Sexual Behaviour work, including children who exhibit such harmful behaviour and who are dealt with outside criminal justice routes.  The Social Worker supports YOS operational staff with consultancy when required. The Service also contributes to the Youth Justice pooled budget. The Deputy Director of Children's Services manages the Head of Service for the YOS.  
 
	4.4  	EDUCATION 
 
The previous allocation of 300 hours per year of education psychologist time ceased in 2017/18 although Educational Psychology (EP) support was provided to appropriate children in custody during 2018/19.   The EP support to children and young people in custody has recently been suspended 
For 2019/20 the YOS has an initial allocation of 140 hours per year of Learning Support Service Teacher time which is accessed through the team manager.   
The SEND team will also provide access to specialist advisory teachers for communication and autism, or a more general SEND expertise according to individual case needs. This contribution will be reviewed if experience shows additional input is needed to meet specialist educational needs of young offenders. 
Students working with YOS who are also under assessment for a possible Education and Health Care Plan will be seen by an Educational Psychologist as part of their statutory service. 
The YOS supports and can be members of the Team around the School, particularly for those pupils who do not have special educational needs, but whose educational progress is unsatisfactory.  The June 2019 Somerset Youth Justice Partnership Board meeting will concentrate on educational issues. 
Education makes no financial contribution to the Youth Justice Pooled Budget. 
	4.5 	HEALTH 
The Clinical Commissioning Group funds Somerset Partnership, a local health provider, to employ and second a Forensic Psychologist from the CAMHS service to the YOS for four days per week. The psychologist receives clinical supervision and support from CAMHS.  The psychologist also offers placements to Doctorate students from the University of Exeter, which extends the reach of the health offer during placement periods.   
Health is represented on the Partnership Board by the Clinical Commissioning Group Associate Director of Commissioning Women's and Children's Health (Acting).  The Clinical Commissioning Group makes no other contribution to the Youth Justice Pooled Budget.   
 
 The Clinical Commissioning Group also receives temporary funding from NHSE (National 
Health Service England) during 2018/19 and 2019/20 which, it is agreed with the NHSE Health & Justice Commissioner, will fund the Speech and Language therapist hours and, the additional one day per week of Forensic Psychologist time during that period.   Discussions are open with CAMHS over the challenges to the health offer, once this additional funding ceases in March 2020. 
 
	4.6  	RESETTLEMENT 
 
Somerset has an extremely low rate of use of custody and thus arrangements for resettlement of offender's post-release are made on an individual bespoke basis.  Individual young people have access to a range of accommodation and support services through Young people aged 16-24 have access to a range of accommodation and support services through the Support & Accommodation Allocation and Review Panel for 16+ chaired by the Head of Service for CLA and Leaving Care.  
 
This includes P2i (Pathway to Independence) accommodation and floating support and Team 8 Adolescent Services which may enable an offender to return home or find alternative accommodation. Where this is not possible, P2i enables advance booking of places for young offenders leaving custody to support resettlement plans. 
 
Somerset took part in the 2019 HMI Probation inspection of resettlement cases and received overwhelmingly positive feedback from the Inspector on its multi-agency post custody work. 
 
	4.8  	TROUBLED FAMILIES 
 
In Somerset the Troubled Families Programme is embedded in the Local Authority Prevention and Early Help offer. The YOS provides information about young offenders and their offending under YJB data sharing arrangements. This is used to help identify eligible families and to assess project impact in terms of reduced offending. 
 
 
	4.9  	POLICE AND CRIME COMMISSIONER 
 
The YOS works closely with the Office of the PCC (Police and Crime Commissioner) in several settings. The YOS receives funding from the PCC which is routed through the Safer Somerset Partnership. This year it is agreed that this funding will continue to support assessment and intervention with young people who are victims or perpetrators of abuse within peer relationships, including sexual and criminal exploitation.  The staff delivering this work are now based within Prevention Services but reporting to the Safer Somerset Partnership and will continue until the current funding ends in March 2020. 
4.10  COMMUNITY SAFETY 
 
The YOS Manager is a member of the Safer Somerset Partnership, which oversees operational planning for Community Safety. This includes PREVENT activities within the counter terrorism strategy and information sharing related to serious and organised crime and also the county Wide One Team initiative. 
Work is also now progressing on countywide Missing and Vulnerable to Exploitation (MAVE) meetings.   These multi agency meetings are being held at district council level and are designed to offer senior managerial oversight and direction to high risk cases where existing practices have not effected positive change for children, young people or vulnerable adults. 
	5  	WORK WITH YOUNG OFFENDERS 
 
	5.1 	Asset Plus 
 
Asset Plus is the assessment and planning tool that the YJB requires YOSs to use. Asset Plus forms the basis of our electronic case recording and management system (Careworks).  Careworks is a system of some antiquity now and it had been planned that progress would be made on sourcing a revised system, but this will be impacted by austerity measures in place. 
	5.2  	PACE and Appropriate Adults 
 
The YOS continues to provide appropriate adults (from the trained volunteer team) for children in Police interviews where a parent, carer or family sourced responsible person cannot attend.  The arrangements whereby the police pay the YOS also to provide 
appropriate adults for interviews with vulnerable adults, has been extended until the end of March 2020.  The current volunteer team has capacity to meet these demands.  Work is ongoing to better identify the demographics of our volunteer pool, to best meet the needs of service users. 
	5.3  	Unpaid work 
 	It is the responsibility of YOSs to deliver unpaid work programmes, although we have very few such orders, including those transferred in from other areas.   In our geographical context, the only approach to uncommon but demanding requirements such as these is to deal with them on a bespoke basis, which we have done and will continue to do whenever necessary. 
	5.4  	Child Exploitation 
 
All young people who enter the service are screened for indicators of sexual or criminal exploitation (as well as experience of domestic violence as victim, witness or perpetrator).   As stated above, the Healthy Relationships workers funded by the Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) have transferred to Prevention Services but remain available to work with children involved with the Youth Justice system.   The development of the MAVE model (outlined in 4.11) will allow for improved targeting and allocation of resource and service improvement for children and young people who are being exploited. 
The YOS complies with the requirements of the National Referral Mechanism (NRM).  Several NRM referrals have been made and impacted outcomes for children and young people who were at risk of being regarded as offenders, rather than exploited children.      
	5.5  	Family and Parenting Work 
 
We remain committed to working with the parents and carers of young people at risk of offending or those who have offended.  Wherever possible this is done through voluntary contracts so parenting orders are used only in those cases where there is no alternative. Prevention teams offer Non-Violent Response (NVR) parenting approaches and it is planned to roll this training out in to the YOS to respond to incidents of child to parent violence. 
	5.6  	Offender Management 
We continue to develop information and intelligence sharing arrangements with the police to enable better joint management of our most concerning young offenders. We will work together to make best use of new analytic tools available to the police. 
A growing concern is the prevalence of organised drug dealing in Somerset, including the increasing presence of County Lines gangs, with 19 lines currently identified in Somerset.   These represent a clear risk to children both in terms of increasing availability of Class A drugs and potential criminal or sexual exploitation.  The YOS maintains close intelligence links with the police and other relevant agencies through the seconded police officer and attendance at the Somerset Safeguarding Children Board, Safer Somerset Partnership and the One Team meetings.  
The seconded police officer also records children in contact with the YOS on the Police recording system, Niche, to facilitate effective multi-agency management of these offenders.   
5.7 	Notification of overnight holds  
(Based upon information between 1/4/18 and 31/3/19) 
'Overnight' is defined as where the release date is at least one day after the arrival date.  Somerset counts are based on where the Home Address is listed within Somerset.  During 2018/2019 there were 93 young people from Somerset held in custody overnight.   
 
• 15 female 
• 67 male • 11 unknown. 
Of the 93 young people from Somerset, 81 were detained in Bridgwater, 10 in Keynsham and 2 in Patchway. 
107 Children from other areas were detained within Somerset, including 1 from Banes, 4 from Bristol, 41 from North Somerset, 22 from Out of Force area, there were 39 children where their home address was blank. 
	5.8 	Looked After Children  
The rate of offending by Somerset Children Looked After, as measured by the national Department for Education indicator, has increased slightly from 4.7% to 6% this year. It is currently difficult to judge recent performance as we await national and statistical neighbour data however, the rate in Somerset (and nationally), remains above that for the general population of children.  To seek further improvement, we will continue to develop closer working links with Childrens Social Care. This will be achieved both through colocation where opportunities arise through the staff re-location outlined above, and through operation of the revised interagency Protocol on reducing offending by and not criminalising Children Looked After which is now being developed.  
 
	6 	SERVICE IMPROVEMENT 
 
	6.1 	QA and Participation (See appendix 1 - Participation Strategy) 
 
The duration of the three-year viewpoint license was extended at no cost after initial implementation difficulties, but the contract has now terminated. Financial pressures mean it is not intended to purchase a replacement.   Instead, a combination of face to face feedback and an in-house electronic system (using free survey software) will be used to collect and understand user experience. 
 
In line with YJB expectations one of the two YOS Operational Managers has been nominated as the Participation Champion and is now working with the engagement team to build a robust engagement strategy for the YOS.  As part of its work the YOS adheres to the principles and values of the Somerset children's trust participation strategy.   
 
Participation is considered a priority action for development over the coming year and will be enhanced by: 
 
• increased YOS engagement and membership of the participation network 
• bespoke engagement specifically for YOS (working with commissioners) 
• training for YOS staff and volunteers (community involvement team)  
• development of a practice toolkit 
• refresh of the YOS information on the new SCC website  
 
We will continue to develop the use of volunteers as representatives of the communities we serve, as well as an unequalled resource for young people.  In particular: 
 
• we are seeking to improve our volunteer demographic data set to better target potential sources of representative volunteers, such as local further education and training providers 
• appropriate Adults Service recruitment continues to develop volunteer resources in the area of highest demand so as to meet the on-going needs of a service for juveniles and vulnerable adults 
• referral order panel training of volunteers is on-going to ensure we maintain our ability to operate panels across the whole area.  The Referral Order steering group has been relaunched and representatives of this have attended the Youth Court Magistrates' Panel meeting to maintain effective links 
• we have continued to develop community reparation activities to support work involving volunteer input particularly with young people subject to Referral Orders. 
. 
	6.2 	Domestic Violence and abuse 
 
As stated above, in accordance with the renewed agreement with the Police and Crime Commissioner, (now managed through the Safer Somerset Partnership), we continue to fund staff time focussed upon teenage relationship abuse and exploitation and delivering Healthy Relationships work.  Abuse takes many different forms including, verbal, emotional, physical, sexual and coercive control and in some cases the roles of victim and perpetrator are interchangeable.  Young people involved in such relationships often fail to access relevant services, feeling unable to seek help or failing to recognise their need for this. The specialist staff are trained to deliver interventions to all young people who are identified through an initial screening process as victims and/or perpetrators.    
 
	6.3 	Private Providers 
 
There are a relatively large number of privately-operated care homes in Somerset that take placements of Children Looked After, including many from external Local Authorities.  This creates demands upon local services for which many agencies, including the YOS, receive no additional funding.  Work generated by vulnerable teenagers placed in these homes generally accounts for nearly 20% of total demand on the YOS.  For court outcomes such as youth rehabilitation orders, they account for 35% of all orders, bail programmes 34.6% and custodial outcomes 36%.  The development of effective working relationships has always been important to criminal justice agencies because of violence, absconding and offending by this particularly troubled group of young people. These relationships are now even more important for the whole of Children's Services with the placement of children vulnerable to exploitation and the operation of units specialising in accommodating children who have been victims of sexual exploitation. There are ongoing meetings with groups of these providers and the YOS will continue to support this partnership work.   The developing multi agency work to create a revised protocol to prevent criminalisation of Children Looked After will be dependent upon close and effective working and trusting inter agency relationships. 
	6.4 	Speech and Language 
 
The contract to purchase specialist Speech and Language Support from Somerset 
Partnership has been renewed and provides specialist assessment and expert support for YOS staff working with children identified through the Asset Plus assessment and planning framework as having speech, language and/or communication difficulties. This is an important specialist resource for YOS cases and equates to 0.2 FTE resource of which the funding ceases in March 2020. 
	6.5  	Staff Training and Development 
 
The loss of experienced staff, developments in partner organisations, social change and progress in understanding adolescent behaviour combine to create a need for continuing investment in staff training and development.  Priorities which we will continue to address are: 
• the need for a renewed training audit in the coming year to be led by Operational Managers 
• the approved system in Somerset for assessment and intervention work with children who behave in sexually harmful ways, including those convicted of sexual offences, is AIM2.  We have sourced training from the only provider, which is being used by YOS staff from Somerset and neighbouring YOS and for Social Workers from Children's Social Care. This is intended to increase opportunities for joint agency co-working with the increased number of children displaying harmful sexual behaviour.  The current 
AIM2 model will be superseded by AIM3 this coming year, which will create funding challenges as staff and manager training will need to be updated, 
• substance misuse assessment and intervention work at Tier 2 had previously been delivered by prevention teams under external funding arrangements.   YOS practitioners and intervention workers are also trained to carry out screening and assessments and deliver Tier 2 interventions to young offenders and will continue in this role as the additional external funding ended March 2019. 
• other than the post seconded from Children's Social Care, the YOS has no other social work qualified staff - one YOS practitioner and one YOS team leader are being supported to undertake Social Work training which completes this year.  Their release to these courses and no backfill has led to significant work load pressures across the service. 
• the YOS casework staff meet each month for half-day workshops facilitated by in-house and external trainers/providers. The formalised elements of these workshops are recorded in the minutes. 
• the YOS Forensic Psychologist will continue to deliver training to staff in working with Trauma. We have sought to join the Avon & Somerset Enhanced Case Management pilot, which is based around a trauma recovery model of intervention, but this is currently on hold because of difficulties in recruiting suitable staff.  
• One YOS team leader has been accepted for HM Inspectorate of Probation for training in order to act as a local assessor in inspections of other YOSs. This arrangement is expected to bring back learning to Somerset which will be used to inform ongoing service improvement. This is especially important in relation to the new inspection framework which is now in place. 
	6.6 	Mobile Working 
 
The County Council completed major changes in the provision of ICT equipment, facilities and support during 2018/19. This has resulted in YOS staff having improved ICT resources including lighter devices with touch screens operating on Windows 10 to replace outdated Windows 7 laptops. 
 
We investigated the Mind of My Own app used by Children's Social Care to communicate with looked after children, but it was clear that it would not serve the YOS purpose at this point. 
 
The use of hot spots on mobile devices allows staff to work fully mobile and minimises the impact of covering such a large geographical area with poor transport availability for  families without independent transport. Mobile hotspots supports staff complete their  case recording contemporaneously and not wait for touch down at an office base. 
 
	6.7 	Victims and RJ 
 
Staffing - The YOS structure includes a 0.5 FTE dedicated victim post. The seconded police officer also has the skills to deliver victim work and Restorative Justice in the other half of the county.  A challenge is that her time is increasingly absorbed by offender management work required by the Police. Despite this the YOS has a high rate of victim contact and subsequent engagement.  
Victim contact 
Contact with victims across both East and West sides of the county has only been captured since January 2019.  Prior to this, volunteers in the East did not contact victims. Work to improve consistency in volunteers recording and victim contact data returns have been identified as an area for development in the coming year.   
Progress made since January 2019 includes: 
Record contact with 100 victims across Somerset, resulting in:  
• 11 Restorative Justice Conferences 
• 1 Shuttle Mediation 
• Letters 
72/100 recorded contacts made were in the West Somerset area, resulting in     
• 20 requests for a restorative Face to Face meeting 
• requests for a Letter of explanation/apology 
• 29 requesting nothing 
• 20 did not respond to email/voicemail/letter 
28/100 victims contacted were in East Somerset area, resulting in  
• 5 requests for a restorative Face to Face Meeting 
• requests for a Letter of Explanation/Apology • 8 requesting nothing 
• 13 did not respond to email/voicemail/letter 
Support for Victims 
The 'Lighthouse victim support service' contact all vulnerable victims and victims of serious crime. All under 18-year-old victims are considered vulnerable.  The YOS is a signatory to the Memorandum of Understanding which sets out the basis for collaboration with Lighthouse, the Avon and Somerset Police victim support service.  Lighthouse signposts and refers victims to support agencies and keep them updated of case progress.   
Restorative Justice - Somerset also has access to a restorative justice service called Resolve 
West, and the Young persons' victim support service is run by North Somerset YOS, called 'The Young Persons service'.  The YOS victim worker has access to the South West Victim Forum which is held every four months. The enables exchange of good practice and updates on policy and practice.   
 
	6.8 	SEND 
 	In 2018, the YOS received an award in recognition of the quality of its SEND related work linked to the breadth of the heath offer. We will sustain this standard and build upon it.  
The YOS now attends the group addressing Children Missing Education and the panels for Vulnerable and Excluded Pupils.   The 2 YOS Operation Managers are members of the  MAVE panels across the county.  
	6.9  	Community Safety Public Protection Incidents  
With the cessation of national reporting requirements YOSs are required to establish local arrangements for review of critical incidents. It has been agreed by the Somerset Youth Justice Partnership Board that Somerset YOS will continue to follow the previous guidance with the difference that where incidents occur, they will be reported to the Chair of the Board (currently the DCS) for a decision as to which process of review should be triggered. 
Throughout 2018 / 19 we recorded two incidents requiring this approach. 
1 - Yeovil stabbing incident, involving two males, 16 and 19 years respectively. 
2 - Midsummer Norton, stabbing incident involving one male aged 17 years. 
In 2019, one serious safeguarding incident notification of a male aged 17 was made directly to the Chair of the Board. 
6.10  Out of Court Disposals 
 	Throughout 2018 /19 local scrutiny of these processes and particularly the joint YOS/Police decision making process, did not give cause for concern about the operation in Somerset.   However, as we face increasing complexity in the lives of the children and young people with who we work, we are revising our protocol and process with Avon and Somerset Police, to ensure resources are targeted on those most likely to go on to further offending.   
We will: 
• continue to use the Fact-Finding Tool (developed by Bristol YOS) for Youth Caution cases, and case workers will only move to a full Asset Plus in agreement with a team leader and where increased risks are identified  
• continue to assess Youth Conditions Cautions using the Asset Plus tool  
• we will move to the majority of community resolutions and youth Cautions being offered the Choices and Consequences workshops run by our police civilian intervention worker, where appropriate with any additional requirements only being offered following agreement with a team leader 
• continue to ensure children understand the requirements of Cautions and Conditional Cautions and have access to specialist staff where there are communication difficulties which could hinder this understanding 
• contact all victims including corporate victims and ensure they are offered the opportunity to feed their views into the criminal justice process which may include participation in a Restorative Justice Conference 
• always seek to work proportionally and not over intervene in a child or young person's life and development.  Where appropriate, they will be referred to the YOS Risk Panel and management measures that have been put in place may continue beyond the  caution period. This is commonly the case where sexual offences are involved  
 
6.11  Joint Agency working 
 	As well as agreeing the protocol for working between the YOS and Children's Social Care (revised and signed off Feb 2019), the Board has agreed that, as opportunities arise, YOS staff will be co-located with Children's Social Care teams in order to facilitate this joint working.    This is ongoing work and whilst YOS staff are now located in SCC and District buildings they are not always in close proximity to social work or prevention teams.  The YOS Manager continues to negotiate with SCC property and premises teams.  
6.12 General Data Protection Regulations 
 	The YOS Manager is the data controller for the YOS. The YOS is working closely with the 
County Council to ensure that full compliance with the latest regulations is maintained. The YJB has recently confirmed that the prohibition of deletion of records potentially relevant to child sexual abuse inquiries, which originated with the "Goddard Enquiry" remains in force.  
 
	7 	RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY 
 
	7.1 	Demand 
 	 
The levels of demand for Youth Justice Services in Somerset (and nationally) remain at low levels compared with a decade ago. There is no reason to expect significant change through the current planning year, although some other areas are seeing an increase in work volume. We will continue our monthly monitoring of Appropriate Adult and first time entrant numbers, as early indicators of potential changes in demand. We also monitor the numbers of cases assessed as high risk and/or vulnerability. There is no doubt that the steady reduction in first time entrants to the Youth Justice system has run in parallel with an increase in the caseload of the proportion of children with more complex needs. These children place higher demands upon staff time, particularly where they become cases subject to MAPPA (the statutory Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements) and/or are subject to Intensive Supervision & Surveillance requirements. A complicating factor is the Looked After Children young offenders placed in private care provision in Somerset by other local authorities. These cases are commonly assessed as high risk and vulnerability and sometimes arrive with existing orders, including Intensive Supervision and Surveillance requirements which Somerset may become responsible for delivering, despite the high demand on resources thereby created. 
 	These pressures are managed by prioritising higher risk statutory work and managing levels of delivery of other work, such as out of court disposals. 
	7.2 	Resourcing  
 
Partner Contributions have significantly reduced over the last few years.  Police and 
Probation cash contributions are now reflective of overhead costs for seconded staff only.  SCC has also reduced its financial contribution linked to financial imperative work.  The YOS has diversified its management structure, deleted vacancies and reduced its YOS premises portfolio through co-location.  A consequence of the reduction in premises is an anticipated rise in travel costs and venue hire to see young people.   
 
The service is at its minimum capacity to meet service demands and will not be able to consistently meet capacity should any unforeseen 'spikes' in criminal justice activity occur.    
 
The ability to release staff to attend social work training placements is also an area of significant challenge, especially since social work training candidates are habitually our most experienced practitioners who hold high volume and more complicated caseloads.  
 
Whilst the Youth Justice Grant is confirmed for 2019/20, with a 0.94% reduction this year, it is unclear but anticipated that there will be future reductions, (the promised consultation has not yet commenced). There is always a concern that those resources that remain beyond March 2020 will be diverted away from rural areas to support YOS in metropolitan high crime areas without proper reflection of the costs of operating in rural areas with dispersed services and at significant distances from custodial and childcare community placements. 
 
	7.3 	Socio-Economic factors 
 	 
Whilst we were concerned that reforms in the welfare benefit system might lead to a rise in acquisitive and street crime, any effect has been eclipsed by other factors. In particular, there appears to be an increased level of involvement and exploitation of young offenders in organised drug dealing, including County Lines criminal operations. We do not yet have statistical evidence to support this, but anecdote and intelligence suggest we are facing a potentially significant increase in associated offending, particularly violent offending. We will monitor this during the coming year and maintain the existing close links with the Police and the local Community Safety Partnership and work collaboratively with social care leads on the MAVE agenda. 
 	 

8.0  	APPENDICES 
8.1  	APPENDIX 1 - PARTICIPATION STRATEGY - APRIL 2019 
 
 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Somerset Children's Trust  
Children and Young People's Participation Strategy  
  
'Harnessing each partner agency's knowledge, experience and commitment in engaging children, young people and families to improve services'  
  
  	  
  

  
 
T:\CSC Managers\Strategic Managers\Lise Bird\YOT\Board Reports\Somerset Youth Justice 
Plan\SOMERSET YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN 2019-20 FINAL.docx 
 
  
  
Somerset Children's Trust   
Children and Young People's Participation Strategy  
  
'Harnessing each partner agency's knowledge, experience and commitment in engaging children, young people and families to improve services'  
  
Executive Summary  
The purpose of this strategy is to set out the Somerset Children's Trust's (SCT) commitment to and standards for participation and engagement for SCT members. For a number of years there has been a commitment to hearing the voice of children and young people, with many examples of excellent practice. This strategy aims to embed this good practice to ensure that children and young people's individual and collective voices make an impact on the design and delivery of the services that affect them and influence the improvements required by Our Plan - the Somerset Plan for Children, Young People and Families 2019 - 2022. This acknowledges that SCT members may hold individual organisational participation strategies and that this strategy seeks to encompass the participation and engagement work of members collectively across Somerset.  
The strategy was developed in consultation with a small number of children and young people, and participation workers from across the partnership. It sets out:-  
• The guiding principles of the strategy  
• The legal and statutory framework for participation  
• The benefits of participation  
• Participation practice requirements  
• Plan of action  
 
1. The guiding principles of the strategy  
The Strategy is predicated upon the following beliefs:  
• All children and young people have the right to be heard and have their views valued and acted upon.  
• All SCT members undertake to involve children and young people at all levels in shaping their services, and acknowledge that this enhances the quality of services provided and creates services that people want and need.  
• Appropriate feedback is given to children, young people and their families, in a timely fashion, about the impact their feedback has had upon the service delivered.   and is supported by the recognition that:  
• Children and young people can participate in a number of ways and in a  variety of contexts. This can be as individuals, in groups or as representatives. It happens at three levels:   
o Level 1: young people making decisions that affect their lives, for example in the drawing up of their Education, Health and Care Plan or in deciding which school or clubs they attend.  
o Level 2: young people influencing the delivery of the services they receive, for example, having a complaints / compliments procedure easily accessible to young people, young people being asked to evaluate the service or young people being involved in interviews for front line staff.  
o Level 3: young people being involved in the governance of an organisation, for example being involved in commissioning processes on service design and delivery, or helping to draw up policies to enable an organisation to operate more effectively.  • Participation is a developmental process and not a 'one-off' activity. Different levels of participation opportunities need to be offered to enable young people to develop the skills and confidence needed to properly engage with the more complicated processes.  
• Opportunities for children and young people to have their voices heard will be appropriate to their age and abilities and appropriate support will be offered to enable young people to take up these opportunities.  
• All young people should be offered opportunities at all three levels, although it is understood that not all will want to take them up at levels 2 & 3.  
  
2. Legal and statutory framework for participation  
The principle that the wishes and views of children and young people should contribute to both individual case decisions and service improvement is enshrined in the Children Act 2004, statutory guidance for services for Children Looked After (HM Government 2010), Positive for Youth (2012), Health and Social Care Act (2012), Children and Families Act (2014), HMIC inspection guidance (2014), Safeguarding Services (HM  
Government 2015), Young People's Public Health Framework (2015), Ofsted Single Inspection Framework (2015), as well as Article 12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989).  
  
3. The benefits of participation  Somerset Children's Trust and its members acknowledge that hearing, and acting on, the voices of children and young people is beneficial:  
 
• For children, young people and their families o Children and young people have an increased belief in their ability to   create change and feel they have some control over aspects of their lives  o  Increased social inclusion and opportunities for active citizenship  
o Increased levels of responsibility and decision making, preparing them for later life  o Increased confidence, self-belief and practical skills  
o Developing transferable skills for future education and employment  
  
• For Somerset Children's Trust and its members o More effective services that meet actual rather than perceived need and lead to better outcomes for children, young people and their families  
o Increased take up of services through improved access and positive feedback  o More creative solutions to problems  
o An enriched offer to Our Plan - the Somerset Plan for Children, Young People and 
   Families 2019 - 2022 that gives greater understanding of the stories behind any data  o A workforce better equipped to listen and involve children, young people and their families  
  
• For the wider Somerset community as a whole  o  Increased community cohesion, in that children, young people and their families feel they have a place in their communities and are more likely to remain in them  
o Increased involvement in community action and activity (including voting) from those who participate as children and young people  
o Improved relationships and a more positive perception of children and young people by their communities  
o Better understanding of children and young people's changing attitudes and needs  o Opportunities for positive, proactive multi-generational contact  
   
4. Participation practice requirements  
Participation activity for SCT members will work to meet the following requirements  
Planning  
• Participation and engagement activity is visible as an organisational priority and driven at senior level.   
• Opportunities for children and young people's voices to be heard will be planned for all three levels of participation described in '1.' above  
• Plans are put in place to ensure that the voices of children and young people who are disadvantaged, vulnerable or hard to reach, are heard  
• Ensure that commissioned services adhere to the participation practice requirements  
Practice  
• Children and young people are informed of their right to take part in decision making and understand what is expected of them  
• Children and young people are effectively prepared and supported especially in specific or technical activities such as recruitment and interviews (see Top  Tips for Involving Young People in Recruitment (Appendix 1)  
• Children and young people are made aware of the limits of their influence and any confidentiality issues  
• Children and young people are thanked for their contribution and rewarded if appropriate  
• Children and young people are made aware of what has changed (or not) as a result of their participation, in a timely fashion  
• Participation work is carried out by staff properly trained and resourced to carry out this work, whilst acknowledging that much of this work (particularly at Level  
1), is all staff's responsibility - not the remit of a few 'specialists'  
 
 
Monitoring and Reporting  
• Themes and messages from participation work at all levels are gathered, processed into a useful and easily accessible format and made available within the organisation as a whole and across the partnership  
• Impact and quality measurements are set for this work, tailored to fit each members' purposes  
• A yearly review of participation activity and impact is undertaken by the SCT Participation Worker's Network , with a report produced for the SCT board  
• Regular reports are made to teams and managers about the progress of the work against standards and quality measures  Communication  
• Best practice is shared within and between organisations  
• Information gained from wider participation work, including the impact of participation activity, is shared between Trust members.   
• The successes of this work are publicised and celebrated, with both staff and young people  
• The value and impact, and positive examples of participation work are publicised in newsletters, circulars and on websites  
  
5. Plan of action  
The SCT Participation Worker's Network meets six times annually and works to an agreed Action Plan which supports participation work across the county, harnesses the voices of children, young people and their families, shares good practice and offers support and development to the members of the network.  
  
To meet the above requirements, each SCT member will agree to:  
o monitor the strategic direction of participation across the SCT o receive and review reports from individual and collective participation projects   
o make recommendations for the improvement of participation practice across the SCT as a whole  
o attend Participation Network meetings or events to hear the voices of children, young people and their families where practical and requested  
o review this strategy annually.  
 
 	 
 
  
Somerset Children's Trust  
April 2019  
 
  
6. Appendices  
  
Appendix 1: Involving Young People in Recruitment  
Top tips for involving young people in recruitment   
 How many young people (YP) will be needed? Who else will be there? Are they forming part of a YP's panel & if so who is coordinating the process? Are there any expectations from YP (dress, age, experience)?    Reasonable requests for young people to interview ideally requires 4 weeks minimum notice to allow workers to prepare, train & put necessary paperwork in order & transport to support YP.  
Keep YP updated with times, venue, contact numbers & how many candidates being interviewed.    
  Where possible, interview at times that are  suitable for young people-  
evenings/weekends/holidays; for example, so  that it does not conflict with other commitments such as school or college.   
  
  Invite young people to shortlist with you or spend some time with them to explain why you have chosen to interview the selected candidates.    
  Make sure that rooms are accessible and comfortable for young people. Will there be refreshments? (check YP's dietary requirements)    
  Invite young people to sit on the main interview panel so that they feel part of the main conversation.  
or  
If sitting in a separate YP's panel, ask would they like a worker to accompany them? (in this case, workers must not influence the decision making, but it is ok to pose questions.)    
  Let young people come up with their own questions for the interviewees.    
  Use a question template so that young people can make notes during the interviews- this should include all of the questions that are going to be asked and who will be asking them.   
  
  If you can, write some examples of what a good answer might look like so that young people can use this as a guide when scoring. If this isn't possible, let them know so that they have the time to decide what a good answer is.    
  Give young people time to give their feedback on candidates, allowing time to explain each response and work together to come to a final conclusion (what % of this is based on YPs feedback?).  
Inform YP when any FINAL decisions are made and when this will be.  
How will the YP will be recognised for their time & contribution (letters of thanks/vouchers/certificates)?   Avoid using acronyms and jargon.  
   
 	 
APPENDIX 8.2 	Youth Justice SEND Quality Mark & Lead Status Achievement for All   
 
 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGNED APPROVAL OF SOMERSET YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN 2019/20 
Name Agency Post held in agency Signature Date Chair: 
Julian 
Wooster  Somerset 
County Council Director of 
Children's 
Services  24.07.19 Lise Bird Somerset 
County Council Youth Offending Team Manager  25.07.19 Lydia 
Woodward Clinical 
Commissioning 
Group Associate Director of Commissioning for Women and 
Children's Health 
(Acting)  05.08.19 Emily Walters Somerset 
County Council Interim Head of Virtual School  05.08.19 Liz Spencer National 
Probation 
Service Head of National 
Probation Service -  Somerset,  Bath  and  North East Somerset, and 
North Somerset  25.07.19 Chief 
Inspector 
Sharon Baker Avon & 
Somerset 
Constabulary Chief Inspector, 
Somerset East 
Local Policing 
Commander  05.08.19  
1 

1 

1 

1 

1 



