



CONTENTS

Section 									Page

1. Introduction								3


2. Governance and Service Delivery					5


3. Review of 2018-19							6


4. Performance against Strategic Priorities 2018-19			7


5. Key Priorities for 2019-20						9


6. Learning from Inspections						11


7. Partnership Arrangement						12


8. Voice of children and Young People					13


9. Risks to Delivery								13


10. Financial and Staffing Resources					15


11. Youth Justice Service Management Board Membership		17


12. Chair of South Tyneside Youth Support Plan Sign Off		17


13. How to Contact us							18





Introduction

	Welcome to the South Tyneside Youth Justice Plan 2019-20. The plan should be read in conjunction with a range of other plans that support young people in the Borough to improve outcomes for children, young people and their families. Plans and strategies that support our delivery to improve outcomes include:
* Best Start in Life Strategy (Children & Young People) 2017-20.
* Making Communities Safer - South Tyneside's Community Safety Partnership Plan 2017 - 2020 
* South Tyneside Safeguarding Children's Board Business Plan 
* South Tyneside Children's Services Corporate Parenting Strategy 
* Local Criminal Justice Board Business Plan
* South Tyneside Troubled Families Outcomes Plan 2016-20
* ACPO Children and Young People Strategy
* Joint Strategic Needs Assessment

	The service works as part of the overall vision for children, families and young people in South Tyneside 
	"We want South Tyneside's children and families to get the best start in life remain healthy and aspire to a bright and prosperous future. To ensure everyone reaches their full potential, we will work together to provide the best possible learning and recreation opportunities, with targeted protection, care and support for those in greatest need"
	The role and responsibilities of the Youth Justice Service (YJS), including the requirement for each local authority to produce a youth justice plan, is set out by the Crime and Disorder Act 1998.
	The plan will set out how the Youth Justice Service in South Tyneside are provided and funded and how the service will operate and the functions that it will carry out.  
	The Youth Justice Service is a multi-agency approach to the prevention of offending and to reduce re-offending by children and young people. Our response, with partners, will lead to young people being safeguarded whilst ensuring that victims of crime and the wider public are protected. The partnership will focus on ensuring that those young people that enter the system are supported to address their behaviours, ensure that their risk is managed and that they are supported to successfully reintegrate in to their local communities.
	The service and the plan prioritise three nationally recognised outcomes from the Ministry of Justice: 
- Reduced number of children and young people coming in to the youth justice system.

- Reduced re-offending by children and young people 

- Reduced numbers of young people entering custody (prison), either sentenced or on remand. 



Governance and Service Delivery
South Tyneside Youth Justice Service is continuing to go through a period of transition 
A new Youth Justice Service Team Manager has recently started post in May 2019, who now reports to the Service Manager for Early Help, who in turn reports to the Head of Service Learning and Early Help. These are now permanent changes in the operational management of the service, with the previous Youth Justice Service operations manager having left the authority. 
It is anticipated that there will be a further restructure of the Youth Justice Service within the next twelve months with particular focus on ensuring that staffing is both tailored and meets the needs of service delivery and its core functions. 
The Board has taken the opportunity to commission a review of delivery. This will look at performance against key objectives and make recommendations as to how the service can move forward to ensure that it is fit for purpose and fits with the wider agenda for change in South Tyneside. It will also review the working of the Board against the inspection governance standard and make recommendations on how this can be improved.
Youth Justice Management Board
The Youth Justice Service Management Board continues to provide both strategic direction and oversight of specific youth justice functions.  There is clear focus on holding those functions and the role of the wider Youth Justice Service partnership to account for performance at both an operation and strategic level to ensure it meets the governance and leadership and organisational delivery as set out in the Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation (HMIP) frameworks.
The South Tyneside Youth Justice Service Management Board is currently chaired by the Director of Adults, Childrens and Families.  The main objectives of the Board are:
* To ensure the composition and structure of the Youth Justice Service, how it operates and the functions it carries out.
* Oversee the appointment and designation of the Youth Justice Service Manager.
* Agree annual funding arrangements with focus on the effective use of resources. Furthermore, see opportunity to gain additional resources that can further add value to current Youth Justice Service funding.
* Agree objectives linked to key performance indicators as part of the Youth Justice Plan and evaluate service delivery with particular focus on offending and re-offending. This to align with national Youth Justice Board (YJB) expectations as well as findings from thematic inspections.
* Influence local and regional strategies to promote a youth justice perspective.

The remainder of the Youth Justice Service Management Board has membership from a range of statutory partners including the local authority, Police, Probation, Court service as well as partners from public health, education and other local partners as well as the Youth Justice Board.

The Board continues to meet on a quarterly basis and as well as focus on youth justice outcomes, it takes into account legislative and procedural changes and directives, local, regional and nationally emerging trends as well as outcomes from research and thematic inspections.

Given the recent changes to personnel and management structures within the Youth Justice Service, the pressing challenge for the Board is to ensure that it is satisfied with Youth Justice Service performance through quality assurance and casework audits, performance reports and other findings via National Standards audits.  The Board needs to ensure these findings are both presented and discussed by the Board and additionally it is satisfied that the Youth Justice Service is complying with the conditions of the Youth Justice Board grant funding.

Review of 2018-19
Performance against the national indicators continues to be monitored through the management board. Performance for 2018/19 is outlined below:
FTE's (First Time Entrants)
The number of young people entering the youth justice system for the first time in 2018/19 was 59.  This was very marginally lower than the previous year (60) but significantly lower than the period before (95). Although, the reductions in FTE's is only nominal the positive is that it has continued to decrease the last two years.  
Custody 
For the period 2018/19, there were no custodial sentences with no young people being either remanded or sent to detention.  This is an excellent outcome for the YJS and highlights the need to ensure quality assessments and reports with well thought out sentencing options.  Furthermore, it re-affirms the need to harness partnership arrangements with the local Courts.  In 2017/18, the percentage of custodial sentences issued to young people was 2.6% of all those receiving a substantive outcome from the court. Whilst this was an increase on the previous year, it represents a position below the target of 5%. 
Re- offending
The rates of re-offending have fluctuated over the last few years having increased and decreased in alternative years.  In the previous year there was an increase in the rate of offending in South Tyneside to 0.99 however in the last year this has reduced to 0.40 meaning it is at its lowest in four years.

Performance against Strategic Priorities 2018-19
Children and Young people are law abiding, engaged in positive behaviour and show respect for others
The reduction in physical numbers of young people entering the youth justice system is a positive direction of travel. Links built with the youth service and outdoor education provision have provided alternative directions for young people at risk. Working with early help services has ensured that families are given a joined up approach to support and increased access to universal services. Four members of staff are trained in the Respect programme and offer this intervention to young people deemed at medium risk. 
Parents take responsibility for their children's behaviours
	Working with partners, the service has positively engaged parents in parenting programmes that both challenge perceptions whilst offering guidance and advice to support them in managing any challenges that present. Where necessary, support from early help outreach teams have reinforced messages and ensured that theory is reflected in practice at home. This work will be further enhanced moving forward with representation from the Youth Justice Service on the multi-agency allocation team (MAAT), ensuring that families receive timely services across a range of issues. 
The service actively engages in team around family or care plans to ensure that a holistic response to family need is employed. 

... made him understand himself and the family communicate better", "behaviour is more positive, less angry outbursts", "YOT have been very supportive", "helped him reflect on his actions and looking forward to his future and starting to look towards being more positive"

Parent of 16 year old on YCC
Communities believe that they get on well together and have confidence in the way that crime and anti-social behaviour is dealt with by the criminal justice service
	The service works closely with the safer communities' team to identify public perception of crime and anti-social behaviour. The Public Insights Report for March 2018 found that South Tyneside residents reported that young people being rowdy or a nuisance was the second greatest cause for concern. Work undertaken by Safestop targets the areas of concern.
Victims of crime feel that some of the damage caused has been repaired
	The youth justice team contact all victims of crime and offer them the opportunity to engage in the service. Letters of apology are offered to victims. Engagement levels are not as high as the service would want so new methods of engagement are being explored including the use of Viewpoint to give victims another mode of contact as well as the potential of recruiting a specialist restorative worker.
The public are protected and feel safe
	With the emphasis on adolescent on parent violence, the youth justice service has worked with partners to raise awareness and develop pathways of intervention in this area.   South Tyneside currently runs the Young Persons Violence Advisor Service that supports both victims and perpetrators of domestic abuse with particular focus on the safety of victims.
	The service continued to support the delivery of Safestop, an initiative with Northumbria Police that looks to support a reduction in anti-social behaviour and to ensure that vulnerable young people are safeguarded. In 2017/18, 61 young people were supported by this initiative however this ceased in April 2019.
	Further to the above, South Tyneside Youth Justice Service alongside its neighbouring Local Authorities and Northumbria Police is working alongside the Foundation of Light (Sunderland Football Club) and Street Doctors in delivering the YOLO project. The project aims to use diversionary methods and collaborative working to divert young people involved in anti-social behaviours and those on the cusp of or early stages of offending.
 	In response to the emerging trends identified in 2017/18, the youth justice service has
* Worked with the new edge of care team to introduce a restorative approach to working with those young people at risk of becoming looked after. The team has also supported with parenting interventions.

* Embedded the use of the Asset plus tool, with all staff confident in using this 

* Following the changes to youth courts in the area, the service is reported as continuing to provide an excellent service to the youth court.  This is being monitored via feedback forms and maintaining links with the Youth Lead at Northumbria Court Services.





Key Priorities for 2019-20
	Over the next 12 months, South Tyneside Youth Justice Service expects to:
* Refocus delivery on the core objectives, with a particular emphasis on reducing the first time entrant and diverting young people away from the criminal justice system.  It will do this by:
- Deliver Triage and Community Resolution to those on periphery of and early stages of offending.
- Focus on restorative approaches for victims of crime.
- Focus on partnership working with Early Help services to embed a preventative approach.
- Enhance the quality of Out of Court Disposals and ensure there is a 'step-down' provision for those completing brief interventions but still requiring support.
- Adopt a whole family approach to ensure robust work with young people and their families.
- Working with the Police and voluntary sector in the delivery of the YOLO programme. This will allow opportunity to develop a preventative approach and work in collaboration with the local Police authority.

* When young people have entered the criminal justice system and re-offended, the Youth Justice Service will:
- Focus on desistence and actively support to promote education, training and employment.
- Ensure that sentences are served by focusing on quality of assessments, partnership approaches and using different methods of engagement.
- Build on positive leisure activities and interests.
- Promote engagement within positive peer associations and groups.
- Build on family support networks and ensure there is active engagement and support from parents.
- Develop emotional resilience and sense of wellbeing.
- Understanding of diversity considerations including speech, language and communication. For staff to recognise and response to needs appropriately.
- Focus on exit strategies to ensure that there is a step-down approach resulting in ongoing support for those at most risk of re-offending.



* Focus on reducing and maintain low levels of custody by:
- Producing quality assessments with well thought out and commensurate proposals in Court reports.
- Representation at Court by Youth Justice Service Officers to ensure that information is shared and effective dialogue between stakeholders is taking place.
- Robust alternative sentences to custody are well thought through to ensure they are commensurate to offences and satisfy the Courts that risk will be managed through targeted intervention for those at high risk of re-offending.

* Working with partners in Early Help and schools, there will be a strategy for the early identification of those at risk of offending and interventions offered to divert behaviour. Embedding the preventative approach is key to the work that we will undertake.

* Deliver across the children's workforce a restorative justice approach to working with young people. The service holds the Restorative justice Quality mark (RSQM) and is committed to train the wider workforce in this approach.  It will look to invest in a more restorative focused approach by investing in staff and training.

* Review the governance of the YJS Management Board to ensure a stronger focus on the key objectives of youth justice.      

* Ensure that there is robust data to enable the service to track performance and report regularly on patterns and trends.

* Train staff on the impact of trauma on young people's behaviour. Following the publication of 'Growing Up Neglected' it is crucial that the service is part of a multi-agency response to identifying neglect in the presentation of teenage behaviours.

* Train staff in AIM 3 sexualised behaviour training to meet the demands in referrals for AIM assessments and screenings pertaining to behaviours of a sexualised nature.

* Focus on a stringent and supportive quality assurance framework to ensure effective practice.  This will be achieved through individual case QA processes as well as monthly supervision with practitioners. 

* Provide support and quality training for community volunteers who support youth panels for Referral Orders.
* Enable external audit to quality assure the work of the youth justice service including assessments, plans and workloads to ensure validation of work being undertaken.

* Information from the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment highlights the need for more young offenders to access appropriate mental health services. Working with commissioning services, we will look to improve pathways including linking with the regional liaison and diversion scheme to improve access to wider health provision. 
Learning from Inspections
	South Tyneside Youth Justice Service has not been inspected itself this financial year but remains committed to ensuring that staff are updated with findings from inspection reports and good practice research. Board members will also be briefed on outcomes and learning themes moving forward.
	An emphasis on understanding and applying the new HMIP inspection framework and ensuring scrutiny on performance and quality of Youth Justice Service work is being delivered and measured. Furthermore, learning is applied to local practice from findings of other Inspection reports both locally and nationally.
	In relation to the two thematic inspections published in 2017/18, learning has been disseminated through the team and actions for improvement identified.
	The Work of Youth Offending Teams to Protect the Public (October 2017), highlighted the need to ensure that design and delivery of service takes account of the impact of trauma on young people. This is a key training objective for staff in 2018-19. Whilst we have assessed that staff recognise impact, we believe that specialist input will enable the service to refocus practice and that plans reflect the issue. It will also form part of assessment of risk of offending.
	An audit of review meetings, including risk management meetings, has highlighted that staff are aware of their responsibilities in effectively protecting the public. The service has a clear approach to the management of risk, with regular risk management meetings and a risk register that evaluates all young people active to the service. 
	The report looking at Out of Court Disposal Work in Youth Offending Teams (March 2018) will inform action planning in the current year. The service has reviewed itself against the findings, rating that this is an area of strength. One area identified for improvement is to review plans to ensure that they reflect the use of desistence theory
	In line with the recommendations from the joint inspection team, the board will look to evaluate the quality and effectiveness of the work undertaken.
Partnership Arrangements
The Youth Justice Service Management Board provides links with other strategic partners across the authority within both children's services and community safety. The Board is now reporting to the Best Start in Life Partnership ensuring that young people who offend or are at risk of offending, are recognised in wider delivery of service. 
	The service manager is a member of the Community Safety Delivery Group, the Integrated Services Board as well as sitting on safeguarding sub- committees. The Head of Service Learning and Early Help and the Service manager, Early help  are both members of the South Tyneside Safeguarding Board.
	Sexual Offending and Exploitation
	The Youth Justice Service is represented on the Missing, Sexually Exploited and Trafficked (MSET) groups both at an operational and strategic level.
	MAPPA
	The Youth Justice Service supports the local authority MAPPA arrangements, through attendance at meetings.
	PREVENT
	Staff are trained in the Prevent agenda and work with the community safety team to identify cases of concern and participate in multi-agency responses when this is required. 
	The Youth Justice Service  does not formally commission any external services in the delivery of its key functions but is working closely with Northumbria Police to both raise awareness and put in place preventative measures.
	MAAT - (Multi Agency Allocation Team)
	The Youth Justice Service attends the above forum on a fortnightly basis alongside colleagues from Childrens Services.   As part of its prevention approach it will support in picking up referrals particularly those not meeting Childrens Services thresholds but still requiring support 
	MARAC 
	The Youth Justice Service has a single point of contact who attends monthly meetings for MARAC and links in with the Young Persons Violence Advisor service.

	Out of Court Scrutiny Panel   
	The Youth Justice Service is part of the Out of Court scrutiny panel that is led by Northumbria Police and takes place quarterly.  This is a regional meeting involving all local youth justice teams and the Police.  The aim of this panel is to audit referrals and scrutinise best practice to ensure they are both suitable and appropriate as an out of court referral.  Participation at such panels allows the Youth Justice Service to ensure that those on the periphery or early stages of the Criminal Justice Service are dealt with both appropriately and promptly.

Voice of Children and Young People
	The service values the feedback from children, young people and their families. The service receives regular comments from those involved in the service. The Youth Justice Service is in process of renewing its licence with Viewpoint to collect views and ensuring that the voice of young people and the victims is considered and where appropriate steps taken to address them.








Risks to Delivery
	The commitment to fund the Youth Justice Service remains firm for 2019/20 although there is a reduction in funding from the local authority. Statutory responsibilities will be the main focus of work and resources will be prioritised to ensure that performance targets continue to improve.
	It is recognised that budgets for services remain under the risk of in year saving targets and if this were the case, there would be a review of recruitment or internal reorganisation to ensure delivery. 
	Performance across the first time entrant indicator has showed improvement but the Board is aware that the service is currently below the local and national performance. The service is refocusing its attention and priorities to tackle this area. 
	The service will be represented on the multi-agency allocation team meetings, where young people at risk of offending will be identified and offered interventions from the service to reduce risk. Work with schools is also planned, where identified groups will be targeted and worked with where there are indicators of anti-social behaviour.
	Whilst performance against custody and re-offending remains positive, tracking measures are being introduced to closely monitor young people in the cohort. Data will be used to inform practice as well as being presented to the board who can maintain oversight of the data. 
	Custody and remands remain low. The service has excellent relationships with the court and is able to offer robust alternatives to custody where appropriate. Youth justice staff work out of hours to support packages of intervention and to provide a service to the court at weekends. These measures continue to support low levels of custodial use.
	Risk of remand or custody is reported to senior managers and close links with looked after services ensure that any young person in, or leaving care, has a holistic plan to reduce reoffending.
	The performance information does not suggest that there is any disproportionate representation of any group in the system but this will continue to be monitored through both the service and the board.
	In terms of governance and quality assurance, the service is undertaking a review to understand its position and areas for improvement. External audit will be a crucial part of this and consideration is being given to a peer review. 
	There is a plan to respond to the thematic review of out of court disposal work, with the board looking to evaluate the quality and effectiveness of the work undertaken.








Financial and Staffing Resources
	The budget for 2019- 20has been established at £983, 566. Funding is through statutory partners. As in the previous financial year there is no income from the CCG although financial support from public health commissions the MATRIX substance misuse work. The board have, and continue to, challenge the CCG about resource for the service. 
	Staffing costs form the main outgoing for the service. The board is aware of their responsibility in setting and monitoring that the budget is used for the core purpose of youth justice. In addition, there is regular budget monitoring process in the local authority where the grant conditions are reviewed and audited for compliance.
	
The agreed budget for 2019-20 is highlighted below:

AgencyStaffing CostsPayments in kindOther delegated fundsTotalPolice64,1500064,150Police and Crime Commissioner0000Probation35,6705,000040,670Health35,6000035,600Local Authority478,41000478,410Wales Assembly Government0000YJB364,73600364,736Other0000Total978,5665,0000983,566



Staffing of the YJS by contract type
Type of ContractStrategic Manager (PT)Strategic Manager (FT) Operational Manager (FT)Snr Practitioner (F/T)Practitioners (PT)Practitioners (FT)SessionalStudents/ traineesVolunteerTotalPermanent001129401229Fixed-term0000000000Outsourced0000000000Temporary0000000000Vacant0000030003Attachment Probation0000010001Attachment Police0000200002Attachment Health0000000000Attachment  Substance Misuse 0000000000Attachment Youth Worker 0000000000Attached to another role outside the service (DV)0001020003Attached to another role outside the service (Sanctuary)0001000001Total0013415401239Disabled (self-classified)0000010001



1. Youth Justice Service Management Board Membership

Chair of BoardJohn PearceCorporate Director, Children, Adults & HealthStatutory PartnersTom HallDirector of Public HealthHelen AmorNational Probation ServiceSuperintendent Barrie Joisce Northumbria Police Sarah Dean- GolightlyJoint Commissioner CCG/Local AuthorityMichael BlakeySecure Care Service, NTWLocal Authority PartnersShona GallagherHead of Service, Children's SafeguardingBeverley ScanlonHead of Service, Learning and Early HelpMichelle CutlerCommunity SafetySimone CommonService Manager, Early HelpCourtSusan Eltringham Chair Youth Court Bench

2. Chair of South Tyneside Youth Justice Service Management Sign Off











3. How to contact us

	The Youth Justice Service staff are based at:
	South Tyneside Youth Justice Service
	The Laygate Centre
	38 Laygate Place
	South Shields
	NE33 5RT

	Telephone: 0191 427 2850
	Email: yos@southtyneside.gov.uk







2 | Page






