 
Youth Justice Plan 2018-20 
Update 2019-20 
 

 	 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
 
Foreword from the Chair  	3 
 
Introduction  	4 
 
Update on  the 2018-2020 Service Priorities 	5 
 	 
Executive Summary  	10 
 	 
Supporting and Engaging Young People 	13 
 	 
Structures and Governance 	19 
 
Resources and Value for Money 	20 
 
Staffing and Service Delivery  	20 
 
Partnership Arrangements  	21 
 
Service Development Priorities 2018/20 	22 
 
Risks to Future Delivery   	25 
 
Appendix 1 - STYOS Executive Management Board 	27 
 
Appendix 2 - Glossary 	28 
 	 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOREWORD FROM THE CHAIR 
 
In 2018, South Tees Youth Offending Service (STYOS) produced a two year Youth Justice Plan covering the period 2018-2020. This document reflects upon the progress against the plan to date and sets out the priorities for the year ahead.  
 
In April 2019, STYOS were subject to a 'Single' inspection by HMIP where the overall rating was 'Good', although seven out of eight practice areas were noted to be 'outstanding'. Such outcomes are not achieved lightly, and this is testament to the hard work of the staff who work incredibly hard to ensure a quality, meaningful service is delivered. Inspectors found that staff knew their young people well, and that assessment and planning was 'outstanding' for both Court and Out of Court disposals. Importantly, feedback from the young people about the service they received was excellent.  
 
Over the last year the service has made progress against each of the nine identified priority areas, and as would be expected at a mid-way point there are some priorities which are still in a stage of development. However, significant progress has been made including; the service has been realigned and a new structure went 'live' in January 2019 which enables the YOS to respond more effectively to the needs of the client group. A workforce development strategy is now in place and there have been many training and development opportunities for the staff this year and also identified for the future. An emotional well-being practitioner is now in post following a collaborative piece of work with the PCC office and MIND, and joint decision making with Cleveland Police in relation to Out of Court Disposals is recognised by the inspectorate as good, showing distance travelled since the pilot inspection in 2017. Restorative practice remains an area for development although this part of the business is now fully staffed and we expect to see significant increases in victim contacts and involvement as a result. 
 
An exciting development for the service will be the move to a new case management system in 2020, which will enable the YOS to monitor performance more effectively and produce detailed information to the Board to assist with shaping service delivery, providing robust evidence of where resources need to be directed.  
 
The priorities for the coming year are largely in response to the recent inspection along with our response to key local and national drivers. National Standards will need to embed in practice and we will need to develop a more robust response to 'County Lines' and criminal exploitation in conjunction with our partners.  
 
The future remains challenging with an ever changing landscape for ourselves and partners. However, the recent inspection offers the assurance that we are moving in the right direction, and partners and the public can be confident that STYOS practice is robust. The priorities set for this year can only serve to improve the service further, and build upon the solid foundations already in place.  
 
The YOS should be proud of the achievements to date, and I look forward to working with the service over the next year on their journey to make further improvements.        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
It is the duty of each local authority, after consultation with the partner agencies, to formulate and implement a Youth Justice Plan detailing: 
 
• How Youth Justice Services in their area are to be provided and funded 
• How the Youth Offending Service (YOS) will be composed and funded 
• How it will operate and what functions it will carry out 
• The priorities for the YOS 
 
In 2018 STYOS produced a 2 year plan to outline our approach to developing the service during the period 2018-2020. The purpose of this update is to provide an outline of progress made against the 2 year plan, detail changes which have occurred in year 1, update progress against our service priorities and provide an overview of additional priorities for 2019-2020. 
 
This plan should be read in conjunction with the strategies outlined in the Youth Justice Board Strategic Plan, local Children's Services Plans, Community Safety strategies and the PCC Police and Crime Plan. 
South Tees Youth Offending Service (STYOS) is a statutory multi-agency partnership including: 
 
• Middlesbrough Council 
• Redcar and Cleveland Council 
• Cleveland Police 
• National Probation Service Cleveland 
• South Tees Clinical Commissioning Group 
 
The Update to the Youth Justice Plan 2018-2020 will provide: 
 
• An overview of STYOS performance and achievements during 2018-2019 
• Details of the outcomes for the YOS Single Agency Inspection in April 2019 
• An overview of work undertaken with young people in 2018-2019 
• An overview of the principal partnerships STYOS engages in to support the delivery of services 
• Assurance to the YJB in relation to STYOS plans for the use of our YJB Grant Funding 
• Details for the principal areas for service improvement and development 
• Identification of potential risks to the future delivery of Youth Justice Services and the STYOS strategies to mitigate against these risks 
 
The Principles and Values that underpin our work 
 
STYOS aims to work in partnership with young people, their families and all other services who are engaged with the young person to achieve effective and lasting outcomes through engagement, challenge and support. To achieve positive interaction the following values will inform and direct our work: 
 
• The involvement and voice of the young person will always inform decision making 
• All young people will be engaged as individuals with all intervention designed to meet their needs, including relating to gender, ethnicity and physical and emotional issues   
• Young people will be challenged to take responsibility for their behaviours in order to protect the public and the communities we serve 
• A whole family approach will be taken as well as focussing on the individual young person 
• We will work in partnership with other agencies to maximise opportunity and ensure access to services 
• We will seek to overcome any barriers to accessing information that can inform and guide our work 
• Promote the rights of victims and ensure they have a voice in our work 
• Actively involved victims in our and that they are satisfied with the services provided to them 
• Provide high quality services that are effective, efficient and provide value for money 
 

UPDATE ON THE 2018-2020 SERVICE PRIORITIES 
 
Within the 2018-2020 Youth Justice Plan STYOS identified 9 service priorities, the progress achieved against these is detailed below: 
 
Priority Area 1: Staff Development - Ensure all staff are equipped with the skills and knowledge to promote effective outcomes 
 
Training and the development of our staff is given the highest priority and opportunities have arisen for members of the YOS team to assume more responsibility, develop new skills and broaden their knowledge and experience. A new STYOS Workforce Development Strategy has been established, which based on a review of the staffing needs of YOS staff has detailed the training priorities for the service.  
 
Changes in the YOS management team have occurred with the retirement of the Operations Manager for Redcar which has provided the opportunity for one of our Assistant Operations Managers to seize this opportunity and there have been other opportunities for staff to step up into the Assistant Operations Manager role to provide cover for absence. This process has been supported by a link grade to create the opportunity for staff to make the step up into a management role based on achieving a set of competencies.  
 
In addition, the re-alignment of the service has created opportunity for Assistant Operations Managers to undertake different responsibilities in the areas of performance, service development, planning, and policy development. This has strengthened the management structure and will over time support succession planning.  
 
The YOS has provided many opportunities for training and development for staff with the principal focus being on developing our response to ACES and building our Trauma Informed delivery model. A YOS Case Manager has benefited from involvement with the Middlesbrough Trauma Informed Early Help provision and has participated in training to become a Trauma specialist in the YOS. To support this across the wider team a consultation model has been introduced for staff through the Adolescent Forensic Service for staff to discuss complex cases with a Consultant Psychologist. All staff have been provided with the opportunity to access Signs of Safety training in both local authorities and internally there have been development processes focussing on key areas of service delivery, specifically Referrals Orders and Restorative approaches. 
 
This priority area will continue as a key area of service development during 2019-2020. 
 
Priority Area 2: Structure and Service Delivery: Further develop YOS service structure and delivery mechanisms to promote effective outcomes 
 
The service realignment was introduced in January 2019. The purpose of this was to equip the YOS with a structure which would allow us to respond more effectively to the changing dynamics of our client group, and to support achieving positive outcomes for the young people we work with. The service realignment has been subject to ongoing review by the management team, with a view to evaluating its impact and identifying further opportunities for improvement. To date, the feedback from both staff and managers has been overwhelmingly positive. The strengths of the model were also acknowledged by the Inspectors. 
 
In addition to the changes to the management team detailed above, the roles and responsibilities of our Support Workers have further developed with staff assuming specialist responsibilities for areas of service delivery. Also there has been significant investment in new resources to support intervention. The benefits of this will be seen during 2019-2020 as this work is rolled out with young people. 
 
This priority has been achieved through 2018-2019 and will be removed as a service priority during 2019-2020. 
 
Priority Area 3: Assessment - Ensure that all YOS assessments are responsive to young person's circumstances 
 
Changes to the young person's self-assessment tools were introduced in 2018-2019 with a new selfassessment and revised learning styles tools designed to reflect on age and maturity of young people.  
 
The YOS Inspection in April rated our assessments as outstanding in both court orders and OOCDs providing recognition that staff know our young people well. The Inspection made the following comments on STYOS assessments: 
 
• Assessments were completed to a high standard and make good use of information from other agencies. One inspector commented: 
 
 "The assessment is comprehensive and clear. It provides an excellent offence analysis and a full account of the reasons behind the offence and the young person's view of what happened. 
 
• Staff demonstrate a clear understanding of the young person's lived experience and how this influences behaviour. 
 
The outcome from the inspection highlights the success of the work undertaken by all staff over a period of time from the SQS Inspection in 2013, through to the Inspection in April 2019. This process has been supported by a comprehensive quality assurance approach, including audits and providing 
YOS staff the opportunity to peer review each other's work.  
In addition the introduction of ACEs screening, trauma training and revised self-assessments and learning styles tools have ensured the voice of the young person underpins assessments and we are better able to understand desistance issues and the maturity of the young person. This process had a beneficial impact on planning and delivery of interventions which are now individualised dynamic processes which respond to the needs of young people. 
 
The outcome from the inspection indicates that that significant progress has been made against this priority and as a result it will no longer be a service priority during 2019-2020. However through quality assurances and audit processes we will continue to monitor the quality of assessments. 
 
Priority Area 4: Desistance - Develop understanding of desistance as the primary framework to inform work with young people 
 
This continues to be a learning area for the YOS. The recent Inspection highlighted the progress we have made in our understanding of the factors impacting on the young people we work with and how we build our interventions to respond to these. The inspection highlighted the depth of understanding shown by YOS staff around the lived experience of the young people we work with and how risk judgements are formulated to respond to the issues presented. 
 
Development has been made in our understanding of the primary desistance factors impacting on our young people and how we are developing our work to respond to these and this will continue to be a priority as we build our intervention programmes. This work will also be enhanced as we embed the work of our support workers, the Emotional Wellbeing Practitioner and the introduction of more consistent input from the Speech and Language Service over the coming year. 
 
STYOS has made considerable progress in this area during 2019-2019 and this is reflected in our inspection outcome. As a result our work around desistance will contact but will be reflected in a new priority area focussing on intervention and planning. 
 
Priority Area 5: Planning and Review - Ensure young people plans are adaptable to individual circumstances 
 
The challenge to improve our responses to young people over the course of their YOS intervention through effective planning and review has been successfully met based on the outcome from the YOS Inspection. The inspection noted: 
 
• Planning is appropriate to the identified needs of the young person. 
• Staff are creative in their interventions. 
• There are a range of interventions and these are personalised to the young person. 
 
One inspector commented: 
 
'The review identified that the young person has responded positively to interventions delivered.....the review provides an analysis of risk of re-offending and focusses on the safety and wellbeing of the young person...' 
 
Investment has been made in refreshing our resources to work with young people, in partnership with the PCC and MIND we have introduced an Emotional Wellbeing Practitioner and we are now in the process of agreeing SALT input into the YOS. 
 
The outcome from the inspection indicates that that significant progress has been made against this priority and as a result it will no longer be a service priority during 2019-2020. However through quality assurances and audit processes we will continue to monitor the quality of assessments. 
 
Priority Area 6: Interventions - Further develop the range of YOS intervention to promote positive outcomes for young people 
 
The re-alignment of the service has allowed STYOS to move some of the management resource towards taking a lead in this area and to refresh and renew the offer of the Junior Attendance Centre. As detailed previously, significant investment has been made in developing new resources to ensure the work we deliver is relevant to the needs of the young people we work with. This has included purchasing intervention programmes which have been proven to be effective in practice in use by other YOTS.  It is our intention to see how we can further develop these to reflect the needs of the young people we work with. In addition, there has been investment in other materials and other equipment including IT equipment, a TV and camera all of which bring added benefit to the work we can undertake. The Support Worker team are now more empowered to take responsibility for developing our interventions and collaborative work with other services is ongoing, supported by an Assistant Operations Manager. 
 
Some of the benefits of this approach were acknowledged in the YOS Inspection which praised the creativity of the Support Workers and highlighted the level of take up of interventions by young people. 
 
The work of the JAC was commended in the YOS Inspection and we continue to seek the input of young people to improve their experience in this area. 
 
The YOS were also a partner in a successful PCC led bid to the Early Intervention Fund. This has led to inward investment which has enabled STYOS to introduce an Emotional Wellbeing Practitioner in partnership with MIND to work with young people with low level emotional wellbeing needs. In addition this funding has allowed us to further develop our relationship with the SALT team.  
 
The YOS inspection reflected on the progress we have made in developing our interventions with young people. However it has also recognised that further work needs to be undertaken to ensure that our work in this area focusses on the needs of individuals, supports the vice of the child and uses a desistance based model to build on the strengths in a young person's life. 
 
Priority Area 7: Voice of the Child - Promote the active engagement of young people/parents/carers in YOS activity 
 
As detailed above there has been further development of the tools we use for self-assessment and learning styles, and these are now relevant to the age of young people and their levels of maturity. Revised planning and review documents are also in the early stages of development, with the aim of further enhancing the input of young people and their families into their personalised intervention programmes. 
 
Feedback to the YOS inspection reflected the high regard young people and their families hold the service in with comments on their experience with the YOS described as 'fantastic' and how we have 
'helped them massively'. 
 
Feedback through the JAC and the YOS end of order survey has helped the ongoing development of our work and provided a rationale for some of the direction taken over recent months. Also work is ongoing with a former service user to use their experience with groups of young people and to seek their perspective on our plans for service development.  
The introduction of more structured access and support from SALT will allow us to further enhance how we communicate with young people. 
 
 A number of YOS Staff have attended a VOC conference held by Middlesbrough Council and STYOS plays an active role in the Middlesbrough Participation strategy, both areas where we have been able to showcase success in this area. 
 
In addition to the above young people have been encouraged to play a more active role in development of the YOS Board and some of our young people were involved in the recent board open day, talking about their experiences of YOS and the CJS with board members. 
 
The voice of the child is a key area of our work and STYOS will continue to identify opportunities to ensure that young people make a positive contribution to our work and their voice is clearly reflected in the work we deliver. Our developments with the Speech and Language Therapy Service will further enhance this area of our work and ensure we are able to communicate effectively reflecting the needs of individuals.  
 
Priority Area 8: Restorative Justice - Promote the voice of the victim in our work with young people and provide challenge to young people to take responsibility for the consequences of their behaviour 
 
The challenge to ensure the voice of victims in the work with young offenders has not been fully developed by STYOS. The inspection found that this was an area of weakness for the service and has challenged us to improve this area of our work. 
 
In mitigation for most of 2018-19 STYOS carried a vacancy in the restorative justice provision. A new RJ Officer was introduced from February 2019 and this will support the gap in service delivery and also provide the capacity to extend the scope of our restorative interventions, particularly face to face meetings, mediation and conferencing. 
 
On a positive note one of our RJ workers has secured accreditation as a RJ specialist with the Restorative Justice Council. In addition there have been a number of successful restorative intervention projects over the past year including, the In/Out of the Cold Project, work with the North Ormesby Big Local, Redcar Beach project and a notably successful mediation process with a victim who was seriously injured as a result of the behaviours of 2 young people. 
The inspection has challenged STYOS to ensure victims are listened to and engaged in our work with young people. Also the nature of the interventions we offer to repair harm require further development and this will be reflected as a priority for 2019-2020. 
 
Priority Area 9: OOCDs Joint Decision Making- Ensure a joined up approach with Cleveland Police in decisions regarding OOCD options and broaden the scope of the OOCD offer 
 
Our approach to OOCDs scored full marks across all the Inspection Domain areas, with 4 areas rated as outstanding. Across 11 domain areas STYOS scored over 90% against the inspection criteria and 7 areas scoring 100%. This reflects the positive joint working with the police and other partners as well as the quality of intervention offered to young people to endeavour to divert them away from offending at the earliest opportunity. 
 
In July 2018 STYOS introduced an intervention at the First Caution stage with young people, we are the only YOS in Cleveland offering this and early indications suggest that this is having an impact with engagement levels high and re-offending reducing.  
 
The outcome from the inspection indicates that that significant progress has been made against this priority and as a result it will no longer be a service priority during 2019-2020. However through quality assurances and audit processes we will continue to monitor the quality of assessments. 
 
 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Profile of young people engage with STYOS in 2018/19 
 
During 2019/19 STYOS worked with a total of 310 individual young people. This included: 
 
• 263 male 
• 47 female 
 
The age profile was 
 
• 4 aged 10 years 
• 9 aged 11 years 
• 15 aged 12 years 
• 28 aged 13 years 
• 48 aged 14 years 
• 68 aged 15 years 
• 55  aged 16 years 
• 79 aged 17 years 
• 4 aged 18 years 
 
The ethnic minority profile was: 
 
• 268  White European 
• 2  African 
• 7  Asian 
• 17  Mixed Race 
• 7  Other Ethnic Group ?     9  Not Known 
 
Based on information provided by both local authorities, these figures suggest that there are no concerns in regard to any disproportionate representation of young people from ethnic minority groups in the STYOS offending cohorts. Overall 89.2% of the young people engaged by STYOS in 2017/18 were white European and this compares with the white populations of Middlesbrough 88.18% and Redcar 98.6%. Only 2.33% of the cohort were Asian compared to 7.78% Asian population in Middlesbrough, and 0.66% were African compared with 1.25% African population in Middlesbrough.   
 
 
National Outcome Measures 2018/19 
 
First Time Entrants to the Youth Justice System: 
 
The figure of 79 FTEs is lowest figure ever achieved by STYOS and this is a reduction on the FTE figure for 2017/18 of 86. This reduction has continued the downward trend for FTEs, and reflects positively on the impact of our prevention activity around Triage and Restorative Interventions.  
 
This area of work continues to benefit from the partnership working with Cleveland Police to ensure that all young people who are eligible benefit from interventions through Restorative Intervention and Triage, which offer opportunities for diversion away from the criminal justice system. We will continue to work in partnership with Cleveland Police and the PCC to identify opportunities to maximise the benefits of diversionary and prevention work as well as identify opportunities to develop new areas of service provision where these arise.  
 
One of the challenges presented by the recent YOS inspection was to investigate the opportunities to extend the triage model so young people could benefit from further triage interventions based on set criteria and this will be an area of development detailed in the response to the Inspection report. 
 
Overall STYOS has maintained a downward trend in FTEs over recent years, achieving a significant reduction in first time entrants of 92% between 2007/08 and 2018/19 (936 in 2006/07 to 79 in 2018/19). 
 
 
Re-offending: 
Ministry of Justice (MoJ) data shows a decrease in the number of young people who have re-offended to 41.3% compared to 51% the previous year. There has also been a decrease in the number of offences per young person down to 1.69 compared 2.10 in the same period the previous year. This includes all offenders and offences leading to substantive outcomes between April 2015 and March 2017. (Source: MoJ Proven Reoffending Statistics Tool, January 2018).  
 
As detailed below the re-offending cohort has significantly reduced over recent years and YOS assessment information, including factors relating to desistance, risk, and safety and wellbeing show that we are now dealing with a challenging and difficult to engage group of young people with multiple identified needs that impact significantly on their behaviour. 
 
In order to address this, STYOS has introduced a priority offender process whereby those young people who present the greatest level of risk or safety and wellbeing concerns are identified and monitored and additional intervention can be offered to challenge behaviours.  
The use of a live tracker allows STYOS to identify those young people at risk of re-offending and monitor these for triggers and influences that may impact on behaviour and offer interventions as required. 
 
In addition to the above, the YOS caseload is monitored monthly to identify levels of re-offending and this offers an insight into the impact of the work offered to young people and how this can influence behaviours. 

Use of Custody - Custodial Sentences 
 
There were 9 custodial sentences in 2018/19, which is a significant decrease on 2017/18 figure where there were 22 custodial sentences. This figure has returned STYOS to the sustained downward trend we were experiencing up to 2017/18 and reflects the confidence of the courts in our ability to manage young people in the community. The overall custody rate for 2018/19 was 4.62% (9 out of 195 court outcomes) below the 5% target. 
 
All custodial outcomes are subject to scrutiny by STYOS Management Team to ensure that they are appropriate and in line with the offending by the young person. 
 
In addition, the current cohort of young people continue to be particularly challenging both in terms of their engagement, compliance and levels of re-offending. 
 
Use of Custody - Remand Bed Nights: 
 
There were 4 remand episodes for 4 young people in 2018/19 accounting for 167 remand nights. This is a decrease of 2 remand episodes, a reduction in the number of young people remanded and a decrease in the number of bed nights, compared to 373 2017/18. 
 
STYOS continues to review all remand outcomes. The YOS Management Team provides oversight of all bail proposals to Court and remand outcomes. A review of all remand outcomes is undertaken and a report is prepared, which is scrutinised by the management team to inform future learning. Using this process we have found that none of the young people would have been suitable for a Bail Programme, although these are always offered as an option to the Court. 
 
 
 
A Profile of the factors impacting on offending by young people: 
 
An examination of YOS assessments in relation to 306 young people supervised by STYOS provides an illustration of the principal desistance factors that YOS staff have identified as potential risk and protection factors for young people has shown the following: 
 
The key factors that support the young person to desist from further offending include: 
 
• Learning, Education, Training and Employment 
• Family and wider networks 
• Engagement and Participation 
• Attitudes to Offending/Behaviours 
• Living arrangements, housing and financial considerations 
• Parenting, care and supervision 
• Resilience and goals 
• Features of lifestyle 
 
The above information continues to suggests that where young people have a level of security and support from families/carers and engage in ETE or with other services they have a more positive outlook, show greater resilience and have indicated that they have goals in their life. The most significant change in the factors that support desistance is Attitudes to offending and behaviours. This suggests that the ability of YOS staff to challenge young people is having an impact and they are more able to understand the impact of their behaviours on others.  
 
The key factors that increase the risk of the young person re-offending: 
 
• Thinking and behaviour 
• Features of lifestyle 
• Emotional development and mental health 
• Attitudes to offending and behaviours 
• Learning, Education, Training and Employment 
• Substance misuse 
• Family and wider networks 
• Parenting care and supervision 
  
The above information suggests that young people are more likely to re-offend where individual factors around self-identity, attitudes to offending and victims and engagement with other services are negative influences for the young person. In addition, these factors also highlight that the young person is more likely to engage in risk taking behaviours and be influenced by the attitudes and behaviours of others. The most significant change in the factors which impact on further offending is the inclusion of parenting, care and supervision. This suggests that some of the young people we work with lack effective parental controls and boundaries and with the influence of the issues detailed above are more susceptible to being involved in offending behaviour.  . 
 
STYOS will continue to monitor the nature of those desistance factors that impact on the young people we work with and seek to shape service delivery to respond and address these.  
 
 
SUPPORTING AND ENGAGING YOUNG PEOPLE 
 
What young people said about their YOS experience: 
 
STYOS provides all young people with the opportunity to comment on their experience with the service. During 2018-2019 young people gave the following responses 
 
• 95% said that YOS workers did enough to help them take part in the interventions offered 
• 90% said that they were asked what the YOS could do to support then to stop offending 
• 87% said that that they had a say in what went into their contracts and intervention plans 
• 88% said that working with the YOS helped them realise that they can change 
• 92% said that the YOS took their views seriously 
• 81% said they had a good experience with the YOS 
 
In addition to the above a number of young people agreed to participate in the user surveys as part of the YOS Inspection. Young people told the inspectors that they rated the YOS as 'fantastic' and stated that the YOS 'massively' helped them stay out of trouble. 
 
Comments by young people included: 
 
"The people who we work with make us feel comfortable, it's not as if we were there because of a crime but simply because we made a mistake and that we can easily turn it around with their help". 
 
"After being a part of the YOT, I have not once thought about committing a crime again because I want to prove to them and to my family I'm not going down that route". 
 
"They've taught me that getting in trouble can affect your life, and the situation for others. Offending can massively ruin your life and ruin others'. It can ruin your dreams and goals in life". 
 
The voice of the child remains one of our key priorities and we will continue to strive to offer young people a meaningful voice in the work of the service. Our emerging work with the Speech and Language Therapy Service will support STYOS to further improve how we communicate and understand the needs of the young people we work with and further improvements to intervention planning, review and exit strategies with young people will support positive outcomes. 
 
Examples of Success in Our Work with Young People in 2018/19 
 
During 2018-2019 we have continued to engage the young people in activities which are meaningful and challenge them both with regard to the impact of their behaviour, but also to contribute to their communities. Examples of this has been: 
 
The In/Out of the Cold Project  
 
IN/Out of the Cold is an annual programme of support for homeless people in Middlesbrough. Young people supported by YOS staff have played an active role in this project, collecting essential items to support the homeless over the winter, including clothing, gloves, hats, scarves, toiletries etc.) These items are wrapped in shoe box parcels and young people have been involved in the events where these are distributed to the homeless. This project has been successful in educating young people around the impact of poverty and homelessness and challenged their perceptions of those who they identify as sleeping rough on the streets.  
 
North Ormesby Big Local 
 
YOS Support Workers and young people have worked together to undertake environmental improvements in the North Ormesby area of Middlesbrough. This has included replanting street planters across the area, undertaking maintenance work to bollards and benches and developing and maintaining new flower beds. This work was acknowledged in the North Ormesby Big Local Newsletter and residents have become aware of the important role that community reparation activities play in challenging and engaging young people 
 
 
 
Daisy Chain 
 
With the support of her case manager and an Assistant Operations Manager a young girl who had presented with significant safety and wellbeing concerns was able to produce daisy styled broches for sale by the Daisy Chain Charity. The Case study below provides the overview of this excellent piece of work. 
 
Case Study Kaitlyn 
 
Kaitlyn, 15 years old, was open to the service on an Out of Court Disposal programme in early 2019, having committed a domestic related public order offence. During her assessment, Kaitlyn's case manager developed serious concerns with regard to Kaitlyn's safety and wellbeing at home, and her mother's ability to keep her safe. Added to this were concerns around Kaitlyn's mental health, school attendance, social isolation, and existing learning disabilities. There were also cultural barriers relating to Kaitlyn's African heritage and the impact of this on both Kaitlyn and her sister. 
 
Through her work and engagement with Kaitlyn, her case manager uncovered information that Kaitlyn and her sister had been taken to Cameroon with family in 2014. This was followed by a marked decline in their behaviour and emotional health. Further exploration into the trip raised concerns that Kaitlyn may have been exposed to 'witchcraft' and FGM related torture whilst out of the country. Further information suggested that Kaitlyn's mother was in a relationship with a known criminal and suspected sex offender, who she allowed into the family home with access to Kaitlyn and her sister. Immediate safeguarding measures were implemented and a multi-agency response was put into action involving YOS, Children's Services, Cleveland Police, and other partners.  
 
As a result of the above, it was key that Kaitlyn's work with YOS was used as a tool to support her and her siblings to access the specialist support they needed. In addition to supporting her engagement with mental health services, Kaitlyn was referred to a service which supports survivors of FGM and related abuse. Meanwhile, YOS staff worked closely with partners within Children's Services, leading to the successful identification of a safe residential placement for Kaitlyn, who was ultimately removed from the family home for her own safety, while mum was given support around parenting. 
 
Adjustments were made to Kaitlyn's programme to support her engagement, and a creative approach was used with regard to her reparation - during which Kaitlyn made broaches to be sold to raise money for charity. Finally, Kaitlyn was supported into attending 'fun days' for young people at a local provider, at which it was reported her face 'lit up' during her participation in activities. 
 
 
Redcar Foodbank 
 
During 2018-2019 YOS staff began to develop a relationship with the Redcar Food Bank. This arose from staff identifying that a number of families faced great financial hardship. In order to support these families and improve access to the food bank for the families we work with, an agreement was reached for the YOS to be able to register families and issue food bank vouchers as well as supporting families attend the food bank. 
 
With a view to the future we are looking to develop this relationship further, with a view to young people supporting the work of the food bank in their reparation as well as potentially working on allotments and in other areas of the work of the food bank. 
 
Engaging a Victim 
 
The YOS Restorative Justice Specialist has worked with a victim of youth crime to support them to understand the reasons why they were injured by 2 young people and to facilitate a meeting between the victim, the young people and their families. This process enabled the victim to talk with the young people telling them how they were harmed by their action and how it has affected his life. This has proven to be a positive process for both the victim and the young people and their families. This is detailed in the case study below: 
 
Restorative Intervention Case Study 
 	 
Keaton and Dylan, both 10 years old, were referred to the service in late 2018, following an incident which led to an elderly male suffering a serious head injury. The incident was reported in local and national media, and was met with anger and threats of vigilante justice in the local community. Threats were also made against both the young people and their parents on social media, leading to genuine fear within the families that they would come to harm. It became clear early on in the assessment stage, that while the boy's actions were reckless and thoughtless, there had been no intent to cause any injury to the victim, and certainly not the level of injury which had resulted from the incident. As per practice, the victim was referred to our Restorative Justice Specialist, who made contact with the victim and arranged to meet with him. 
 
The victim became emotional when describing what had happened, and confided that, as well as his injuries, he was finding it increasingly difficult to go out in public since the incident.  He had a number of questions for the boys and their families and wanted to make it clear he did not support the threatening comments on social media.  Whilst he did not want to criminalise the boys, it was very important to him that they understood the impact of their actions in the hope they would not do anything like this ever again. Our RJ Specialist agreed to explore the possibility of a restorative meeting between the victim and the boys. Following the furore on social media, both families remained fearful, and were reluctant to meet with the victim. Through hard work, patience, and above all a passionate belief in the value of the process, Keaton and has family were persuaded to participate in the meeting, while Dylan agreed to communicate with the victim indirectly. 
 
The Meeting 
 
The meeting was arranged in a neutral venue away from the local area, and both parties shared their experience of what happened on the day of the incident. It was a highly emotional experience for both parties. Keaton explained how he and his friend had been playing, and hadn't meant to hurt anybody. He and his dad shared their experience of the backlash on social media and how they had been so fearful of the threats made, and how Keaton's dad had taken unpaid time off work in order to stay home and protect his family. 
 
The victim gave his side of the story, and described the impact on his family, as well as effects on his physical and mental health. He reassured Keaton and his family that he did not approve of the comments made in the media, and explained why it was so important to him to meet with the people responsible.  He asked for Keaton's reassurance that there would be no repeat of the behaviour. Keaton promised he would never do anything like this again and asked if there was anything, anything at all, he could do to make amends. The victim suggested that perhaps Keaton could text him from time to time, to check on how he was recovering. As the meeting drew to a close, the group all stood and hugged each other, they were very emotional before agreeing to leave the building together, as friends. 
 
Following the meeting, Keaton did text the victim, the families got together over Christmas and real friendships were formed. In the spring, the victim even went along to watch Keaton at a local sporting event. 
 	 
Dylan, in the meantime completed a workbook for the victim, detailing his thoughts and feelings about the incident. The victim wrote him a letter in response, explaining why he would like the opportunity to meet Dylan face to face. At the sporting event the victim attended to support Keaton, Dylan was also present, where he was able to apologise in person and have a discussion with the victim. The victim has made a good recovery from his ordeal, and was grateful for the opportunity to meet with the young people and their families. All parties were very positive about the process and believe it has helped greatly in moving forward from the incident. 
 
HMIP Single Agency Inspection April 2019 
 
In April 2019 STYOS underwent a Single Agency Inspection by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation. The Inspection used the new criteria introduced from April 2018, of which STYOS had experience as part of a pilot inspection of casework in December 2017. 
 
Overall the Inspection proved to be a positive process and STYOS received an overall 'Good' rating, scoring 29 against a possible 36 against the domain criteria. The inspectorate rated our work with young people as outstanding with assessment being a strength in both post-court and out-of-court disposals. Case managers demonstrated a clear understanding of each child or young person's life and how that affected their current behaviour and risks. Staff are creative in their delivery of work and there is good use of partnership agencies to meet the needs of the children and young people. Young people supervised by the YOS rated the service they received highly. The key messages arising from the inspection are: 
 
 
Strengths 
  
• Case work- 7 out of 8 of the case work domain areas were rated as Outstanding, the other rated as good. 
• Out of the 23 standard questions used for assessing cases in the inspection STYOS scored over 90% against 16 of these questions and 100% against 9 of these. 
• There was positive feedback from young people about their work with YOS. 
• Staff were described as active in their engagement with young people. 
• There is a high rate of take up of interventions by young people. 
• Assessments are of a high standard rated as outstanding in both domain areas. 
• Staff show understanding of the young person's lived experience. 
• Staff are creative in their intervention and the work of the JAC was acknowledged. 
• The work of STYOS is responsive to the needs of young people and personalised to them. 
• Staff have been trained in trauma informed practice. 
• Relationships with partners are strong including joint decision making for OOCDs with Police. 
• There is a good use of audit and QA processes. 
 
Challenges 
 
• Attendance at the STYOS Management board is not consistent. 
• Board members need to be more challenging in their oversight of the work of STYOS. 
• Victim's views are not sufficiently detailed in assessments. 
• There is a lack of specialist resources to meet the ETE needs of young people. ? Reparation work needs to be meaningful and engaging. 
• There is limited access to Children's Services systems. 
• Police checks are not routinely undertaken on home addresses with regard to staff safety. 
• The policy of only 1 triage outcome is restrictive. 
• Channels for internal communication need reviewing. 
 
The inspectorate have made seven recommendations that will have a positive impact on the quality of the services provided by STYOS. These will improve the lives of the children in contact with the service and better protect the public. 
 
The inspection recommended that South Tees Youth Offending Service should: 
 
1. Ensure that there is a specialist education provision in the YOS to meet the needs of the children and young people who are not accessing suitable education. 
2. Ensure that the voice and views of victims are integrated into young people's assessments and plans. 
3. Develop a wider range of reparation placements which are engaging and educational for children and young people. 
4. Address access rights for case managers to the relevant children's social care case management systems 
5. Make better use of Police checks on home addresses for assessments of young people and staff safety 
 
The inspection recommended that the Director of Prevention and Partnerships should: 
 
6. Ensure that there is an education representative on the YOS Management Board 
7. Work with the police and other local youth offending teams to review and amend the Cleveland Police triage policy. 
 
Based on the recommendations arising from this inspection a development plan has been established to outline the actions that STYOS proposes to take further improve the quality and effectiveness of the services we offer to young people and their families. This was sent to the HMIP on 1st July 2019. The actions detailed in the improvement plan were endorsed by the lead inspector on 2nd July 2019. This improvement plan will be monitored by the YOS management team on a monthly basis with strategic oversight from the YOS Executive Board in its quarterly meetings. This will ensure that the actions arising from the inspection can be owned by the whole service, our partners and feed into strategic arrangements locally. 
 
STRUCTURES AND GOVERNANCE 
 
Structures 
 
As detailed previously STYOS underwent a re-alignment of how the YOS is structured during 20182019. The purpose of this was to equip the YOS with a structure which would allow us to respond more effectively to the changing dynamics of our client group, and to support achieving positive outcomes for the young people we work with. In addition the new structures have also allowed us to build additional capacity to monitor performance, ensure quality and support service development. 
 
Following the inspection in April 2019 further changes to the structure are likely as we develop our response the recommendations of the inspectors. This is also likely to be impacted upon as a result to known and potential reductions in our budget. 
 
The impact and effectiveness of these changes will be monitored by the YOS management team and our Board and may be subject to further review and development subject to any future changes in financial resource, staffing levels and workloads. 
 

 
Governance - Management Board 
 
The YOS inspection described the STYOS Management Board as a 'maturing board' recognising that there has been significant development work to improve the effectiveness of the board in providing multi-agency oversight of the work of STYOS. The developments in the skills and knowledge of board members to challenge performance of the YOS and partners was highlighted as a key area of growth. 
 
However it was also highlighted that further work needs to be undertaken, with inspectors describing a 
'mixed understanding' about what STYOS does and the roles of partner agencies in supporting the work of the YOS. A challenge has been placed to ensure that partners are represented at an appropriate level and the inspectors have recommended that there should an education representative at a strategic level. 
 
The work undertaken by the Head of Service and Board Chair, alongside YOS staff, to increase board members understanding of their role and the work of STYOS was acknowledged by the lead inspector and this work will continue through 2019-2020. In addition work will be undertaken with YOS staff to develop their level of understanding of the work of the board, this will include staff attendance at the board where appropriate and regular feedback to the team around the work of the board. 
 
RESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY 
 
Budget 2019-2020 
 
STYOS budget for 2019-2020 presents a challenge for the service. There are significant reductions in the budget from across all funding providers and this will have implications for the nature of service delivery. Funding from both local authorities will be reduced as well as reductions in the funding from 
Public Health and the PCC has advised of a 20% reduction in the grant to support the delivery of OOCDs. 
The pooled income for 2019-2020 is £1,455,300, plus the continued in kind support of a seconded Probation Officer, 2 seconded Police Officers and the accommodation provided by Cleveland Police at the Redcar Police HQ. 
 
YJB Grant Funding 2019-2020: 
 
The YJB effective practice grant has been reduced by 1% to £797,049 for 2019-2020, this includes £21,726 funding for the Junior Attendance Centre. This funding continues to be the most significant element of the budget and continues to support the work we are looking to undertake in response to our priority areas.  
 
Remand Framework for Children: 
 
The YJB remand grant funding has increase this to £31,392, however this needs to be considered in the context of significant increases in the costs for bed nights across the secure estate. STYOS will continue to mitigate against remands to youth detention through the effective use of our court services and the offer to manager young people in the community. 
 
The remand budget is compliment by additional funding from the 2 local authorities, £29,603 from Middlesbrough and £35,120 from Redcar and Cleveland.  
 
This gives a total remand budget of £96,115. 
 
STAFFING AND SERVICE DELIVERY 
 
Service Delivery 
 
The YOS inspection rated the delivery of services to young people as outstanding, describing effective systems for assessment, planning, review, intervention and engagement. Our staff received the highest praise from the inspectorate for their efforts to understand the young people we work with and respond to their needs, with our Support Workers described as being 'creative in their interventions'. 
 
Over the coming year STYOS will face new challenges, in particular the embedding of new National Standards, how we consolidate our approach to trauma and how this can affect the young people we work with. In addition there are emerging concerns around 'County Lines' and child criminal exploitation. The challenge for STYOS is to understand the implications of these for the young people and communities we serve, and also how we respond where these issues as they impact on individual young people. Part of this will include further training and awareness training for all staff and partners and we will be building on links locally, regionally and nationally with specialist in Police and other partners to access information and secure guidance around our response. 
Staffing 
 
During 2018-2019 there have been a number of changes in the staffing of STYOS. The service management has undergone significant change with the introduction of 2 new managers following the retirement of an Operations Manager and the sad loss of one of our Assistant Operations Managers.  
 
In addition to the above the YOS has secured an Emotional Wellbeing Practitioner, seconded from MIND and this role has offered scope for intervention for young people whose needs do not meet the thresholds for CAMHS but require intervention to support them around emotional and behavioural issues. In 2019-2020 there are plans to introduce support from the Speech and Language Therapy Service and increase their involvement with STYOS over time. 
 
As part of the response to our inspection recommendations there are actions to introduce a specialist education worker role and this will be supported by a role specific ETE Support Worker. 
 
 
 
 
PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS 
 
During 2018-2019 we have continued to embed our partnership arrangements with the PCC. This has resulted in STYOS being a partner in a successful application to the Early Intervention Fund with the YOS benefitting from this through additional funding to secure the Emotional Wellbeing Practitioner and to develop our work around speech and language. This in turn has enabled us to develop new relationships with MIND and the Speech and Language Therapy Service and this will further support our trauma informed approach. 
 
As part of our ongoing service improvement process we have reviewed our partnership with Careworks, the supplier of our Case Management System. This has raised concerns around the level of service support we have received as well as concerns around reporting and accessing data.  The YOS Executive Board have supported a decision to commission a new supplier and this will be progressed during 2019. 
 

 
SERVICE DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES 2019-2020 
The priorities for the service during 2019-2020 have been informed by the review of our priorities as detailed in the 2018-2020 Youth Justice Plan (see earlier), the outcomes from the YOS Inspection and the emerging factors we have identified which will impact on service delivery, including National Standards, CCE and County Lines. Our approach to meeting the challenges presented by these revised priorities is detailed below: 
 
1. Develop the role of the South Tees Youth Justice Executive Board to ensure effective oversight, challenge and support over the work of STYOS. 
 
One of the challenges placed on the YOS by the 2019 Inspection focusses on the role of the YOS Executive Board and how it supports and challenges the work of the service. Since 2017 there has been an ongoing programme of development for board members and some of the benefits of this were borne out in the inspection. The inspection described the board as 'maturing' and recognised the work done to increase the knowledge of board members of the work of the service. 
 
However further challenges remain including the need to embed strategic representation for education services, improve attendance by all key partners and to build the YOS staff understanding of the function of the board. 
 
In order to achieve this attending at board meetings will be monitored and the board chair will challenge agencies who do not fulfil their responsibilities, the programme of open days will continue and all new board members will receive a comprehensive induction on the work of the YOS including opportunities to shadow YOS staff in their work. Also thematic presentations will form the part of the agenda for board meetings and YOS staff will be engaged in these to showcase their work. 
 
2. County Lines/CCE - Further develop the YOS understanding and responses to the issues presented by young people at risk of CCE or impacted upon by County Lines. 
 
The County Lines and Child Criminal Exploitation agendas are key areas that will impact on service delivery in the future. STYOS has started developing our networks to ensure that we are we placed to develop our responses to these issues. Discussions around the potential impact of these issues on our practice and the young people we work have been undertaken with regional and national Police leads and some YOS managers and staff have attended conferences and seminars on the issues to cascade information through the teams. 
 
Locally CCE/County Lines will be overseen through VEMT processes which STYOS are represented operationally and at a strategic level and this offers us the scope to discuss concerns at an individual case level and to escalate concerns around trends and complex cases. 
 
In partnership with both local authorities STYOS has undertaken a screening of caseloads to identify the potential prevalence of young people at risk of CCE and to look at any areas of practice or work undertaken to meet this potential risk. Once completed this will be used to inform training and development needs, and with the VEMT leads in both authorities we will be looking at creating a framework to guide practice. 
 
In addition to the above we will seek to identify opportunities to build capacity in knowledge and experience in this area, part of this will be to take up training opportunities available through the PCC as part of their Early Intervention Fund package. 
 
3. National Standards - Further develop YOS practice and service delivery in line with the changes presented by New National Standards introduced in April 2019 including the monitoring of these. 
 
The YJB introduced a new set of National Standards in April 2019 the purpose of these is to guide YOS around what is expected in relation in the design and delivery of services. Based on the YJB principle of 'child first, offender second' these standards place a challenge on the YOS to engage young people, respond to their needs and interests, build on individual strengths and interests to ensure sustained desistance and achieve positive and lasting outcomes for young people. 
 
These standards offer guidance, rather than prescription and one of the challenges for STYOS is to develop our processes, policies and procedures and how we work with young people, their families and victims of crime. Work has already started to assist staff to understand these new standards and we are also looking to identify how we blend our existing local standards, e.g. timescales for assessments/plans, with the guidance detailed in the new standards. 
 
A key element in embedding these new standards will be in the initial monitoring and evaluation of these and how we have used them to support our work and we will be preparing for the programme of National Monitoring from September 2019. 
 
4. Restorative Practice - Ensure that the views and wishes of victims are integrated into the assessments for young people and influence plans to challenge behaviours. 
 
The YOS inspection placed two challenges on STYOS to ensure the voice of victims is explicit in our work and to develop reparation opportunities which are both meaningful and educational.  
 
 
With regards to our work with victims, we have increased our capacity for staffing in this area with the introduction of a new Restorative Justice Officer post and this has resulted in an increase in victim engagement and ensure the voice of the victims is evident in assessments. In addition we are further developing the work around Referral Orders to fully embed restorative practice in our response to young people who receive these outcomes. In order to further embed quality in our work all areas of restorative practice, including assessments and recordings will be subject to quality assurance against an agreed set of practice standards.  
 
In relation to reparation activity there are many areas of established practice which evidence programmes which have been meaningful and engaging for young people offering both challenge and an understanding around the impact of their behaviours. We recognise the need to develop this area of work further and we will be seeking to engage with victims, community groups, charities and other service areas to identify new projects. 
 
5. Delivering Intervention - Further embed the desistance based approach to work with young people, supported by interventions which are responsive to the individual needs of young people. 
 
During 2018-2019 STYOS has made a considerable investment in developing the scope of the interventions we offer to work with young people. This has included the purchase of equipment and proven resources which we believe we can adapt further with the young people we work with. The feedback of the young person and their experience is critical to this, and we will also be working alongside the Speech and Language Therapy Team to develop our understanding of the language and communication needs of young people. 
 
The Junior Attendance Centre will continue to be one of the focal points for intervention, with an established programme to respond to the needs of young people subject to court orders and OOCDs. In addition we will be building more flexibility into the programme to allow us to adapt this to any events or emerging themes, e.g. the 'knife angel' sculpture which is due to visit Middlesbrough in August 2019 and offers the opportunity to focus on knife crime and its impact with young people. 
 
6. Voice of the Child - Ensure that the views of young people, parents, victims of crime and the community play an active part in the delivery and development of services 
 
The voice of the child continues to be an important factor which underpins all of our work and as detailed previously STYOS has received positive and constructive feedback from young people. This highlights the strength of the relationship developed by staff with young people and their families and a recognition of the impact of the work undertaken. 
 
The development of our work with the Speech and Language Therapy Team provides the opportunity to further improve our understanding and responses to the communication needs of young people. As we develop our approaches to intervention, National Standards and engaging young people and families, how we communicate and understand the needs of individuals will be key to success in our work. 
 
In addition we will be further developing how we support young people through their YOS programmes and beyond the period of YOS intervention. To support this we will be further developing our intervention planning tools, self-assessments and learning styles documents with the input of young people to ensure that these are reflective of age and maturity levels.     
 
7. Staff Development - Ensure all staff are equipped with the skills and knowledge to deliver effective responses with young people, victims and communities. With a focus on County Lines, CCE, Trauma, Speech and Language. 
 
As our most important resource, investment in the staff team will be crucial to achieve all of other priorities. Our focus will be on equipping staff with the tools to embrace the changes planned in service structures and with how we approach our interaction with young people. Key priorities in this area will include CCE/County Lines, Trauma and Speech and Language. With reference to Trauma we will be creating an opportunity with the other Cleveland Youth Offending Services to commission training in this area as part of developing a Trauma informed service delivery model.  
Regarding Speech and Language we will building on our established relation with the South Tees Speech and Language Therapy Service who will be offering consultative sessions to YOS staff and will be spending time within the service to assess our training and service development needs. 
 
In addition, opportunities to further enhance the skills and knowledge of staff will be provided as we engage with the change programmes in both local authority Children's Services. Staff will be offered opportunities through the local authority training programmes, E-learning and training offered by partners 
 
We will continue to create opportunities for staff development. During 2018-2019 two members of staff have been afforded the opportunity to further progress there professional development taking on new roles in the service. We will continue to develop our staff progression model which will allow STYOS to 'grow our own' by creating pathways for all staff to progress through the organisation based on their knowledge, skills, experience and levels of competence. 
 
How We Will Measure Success 
 
The Inspection by HMIP in April 2019 indicates that STYOS is highly effective in undertaking its core duties supporting and engaging young people who enter the youth justice system. The challenge for STYOS is to maintain and further enhance the quality and impact of our work. When reviewing the impact of our work we will assess this using the following criteria: 
 
• The level of engagement by young people and their families with STYOS 
• Levels of compliance with statutory contact and the young person's response to the challenge made by STYOS 
• Reductions in the level and frequency of re-offending by young people 
• Young people accessing additional support services to meet their needs or provide ongoing support beyond YOS supervision 
• Measurable outcomes and achievements for the young person 
• Feedback from young people on their experience with STYOS and their own assessment of the progress they have made 
• Feedback from parents on work delivered with the young person 
• The quality of assessments and plans prepared with young people 
• Changes in desistance factors, particularly the achievement of positive and protective factors in the young person's life 
• Reduction in levels of risk factors relating to the young person 
• Reduction in the safety and wellbeing concerns impacting on the young person 
• Feedback from victims on the impact of our interaction with them and their satisfaction with work undertaken 
• Judgements or feedback from external review processes, including inspection, quality assurance and file audit 
• Feedback from partners on work undertaken 

RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY 
 
The environment in which we work continues to be very difficult and challenging with financial pressures across public services impacting on our budget. Our client group continues to present with high levels of needs as well as presenting greater risk to the public and the communities we serve. Against this backdrop STYOS faces a range of internal and external risks that could significantly impact on service delivery. These include: 
 
• In 2019 it is our intention to commission a new case management system. This will support the improvements in service delivery as well as improved data reporting and information management. However this process can come with a risk specifically the loss of access to system during the switch over and potentially the loss of data, although this would be mitigated against by the supplier. A working group will also be set up with input from Middlesbrough ICT and YOS staff to work with the supplier during the transition process. 
• Funding continues to be a challenge, with reductions already identified this year from the YJB and our partners. Some of this has been mitigated against through efficiencies and not recruiting to vacant posts. Any future or in year cuts to funding could result in the loss of staff resource and restrictions on the services we have to support service delivery. 
• STYOS has for many years had a relatively stable staff team. During 2018-2019 we experience some upheaval in the management team with the loss of 2 experienced members of staff. Fortunately we were able to fill these posts from internal staff, however this creates gaps in the staff team and a challenge to recruit suitably qualified and experienced staff. The pressures of funding may also serve to exacerbate this risk. 
• The introduction of New National Standards offers a potential risk to service delivery as we transition towards embracing the new standards and establish our local response. It is likely that we will maintain some of the previous timescales for assessment and planning to ensure that we continue to offer a timely response to young people. 
• Re-offending by young people continues to be a challenge for the YOS and its partners, we will continue to monitor this using our live tracker tools and offer an appropriate response to those young people we identify as priority offenders. 
 

 
 
APPENDIX 	1: 	STYOS 	Executive 	Management 	Board 
Membership 
Name Title and Organisation 
 Rob Brown Director of Prevention and Partnerships - Chair of the STYOS Board, Middlesbrough Council 
 Kay Dargue Head of Partnerships (YOS Service Manager) 
South Tees Youth Offending Service 
 Deanne Taylor Assistant Director - Early Help Redcar & Cleveland Children's Services- Redcar and Cleveland Council 
 Councillor Barrie Cooper Councillor representing Middlesbrough Council 
 
 Councillor Karen King Councillor  representing Redcar and Cleveland Council 
 
 Linda Bush Partnership  Adviser 
Youth Justice Board for England & Wales 
 Rebecca Scott Advanced Practitioner for Public Health 
South Tees Public Health 
 Supt. Yakoob Teladia Local Policing, Community Safety 
Cleveland Police 
 Ann Powell Head of Cleveland Area 
National Probation Service 
 Kay Nicholson 
 Deputy Director of Operations 
Cleveland Community Rehabilitation Company 
 Lisa Oldroyd Commissioners Officer for Crime Offending and Justice Office  Office of the Police and Crime Commission 
 Alex Sinclair Director 
South Tees CCG 
 Trevor Dunn Head of Education and Alternative Provision 
Middlesbrough Council 
 Lesley Moss Legal Team Manager 
HM Courts and Tribunal Service 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 2 - Glossary 
Abbreviations used in the document 
ACEs Adverse Childhood Experiences LSCB Local Safeguarding Children Board ASB Anti-Social Behaviour MAPPA  
Multi-Agency 	Public 	Protection Arrangements ASBI Anti-Social Behaviour Injunction MoJ Ministry of Justice CAMHS  
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service  NPS National Probation Service CBO  Criminal Behaviour Order OoCD Out of Court Disposal CCG(s) Clinical Commissioning Group(s) OSCT Office 	for 	Security 	and 	Counter 
Terrorism CRC Community Rehabilitation Company PACE Police and Criminal Evidence Act CSE Child Sexual Exploitation PCC Police and Crime Commissioner CSP Community Safety Partnership RSQM Restorative Services Quality Mark DTO Detention and Training Order SaLT  
Speech and Language Therapy ETE Education Training and Employment SCH Secure Children's Home FCAMHS 
 Forensic Child and Adolescent Mental
Health Service  SEND Special Education Needs and Disability FTEs  
First Time Entrants (to the Youth Justice System) STC Secure Training Centre HMCTS  
Her 	Majesty's 	Court 	and 
Tribunals Service STYOS South Tees Youth Offending Service HMIP  
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation TEWV Tees, 	Esk 	and 	Wear 	Valley 	HNS 
Foundation Trust ISS  
Intensive 	Supervision 	and 
Surveillance  YJB Youth Justice Board JAC Junior Attendance Centre YOI Youth Offender Institution LAC Looked After Children    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Tees Youth Offending Service 
1st Floor, 
154 Borough Road, 
Middlesbrough 
TS1 2EP 
 
Telephone: 01642 201888 
Email: southteesyot@middlesbrough.gov.uk 
1 
 

1 
 

1 
 

