APPENDIX A
0
Contents
	3	Executive Summary
5 Introduction                                             
6 Key Challenges and Achievements in 2018/19
	8	Young Person Feedback
	10	Innovative Practice
	12	Structure and Governance
	14	Resources and Value for Money
18 Partnership Arrangements
19 Risks to future delivery against the Youth Justice Outcomes
28 Action Pan 2019/220 
29 Youth Justice Plan Approval 2019/20
30 Appendix A
Executive Summary  
This is Southwark's statutory Youth Justice Plan for 2019/20 as mandated by the Crime & Disorder Act 1988. It sets out the Youth Offending Service's (YOS) priorities for the year ahead and reflects on the achievements and challenges in 2018/19.  Southwark like other London Boroughs has seen the impact of criminal exploitation and youth violence, and YOS officers have experienced the death of three young people known or previously known to them, as well as non-fatal injuries to several other young people. These and other incidents and how to respond to them have been "live" within the YOS. They were also a focus for the Youth Violence Cross-Party Panel, plus activity within the Southwark Safeguarding Children Board and the commissioning of an independent Learning Review into adolescent risk factors and the Extended Learning Review from the Home Office's Violence & Vulnerability Unit. This Plan comments on some of the contributions made and the learning gained from these activities and how the multi-agency partnership locally is responding to the emerging themes. 
The Youth Offending Service has been at the forefront of preventative activity in schools and the plan highlights the work around the School's Knife Crime Intervention, and the real strengths gained from the Peer Navigators' inclusion in the development of the programme.  Further work has also been undertaken with schools around exclusions; the plan recognises the importance of identifying and addressing the learning needs of these additionally vulnerable young people both in community and custodial settings.  Disproportionate numbers of young people from BAME communities encounter youth justice agencies and this Youth Justice Plan sets out the tailored responses to engage young people, including the Ether Programme, work undertaken with Black Heroes to highlight and celebrate the contribution made by local Black role models, such as Britain's first BAME Mayor, the late Cllr Sam King, MBE. Over 80% of young people who started the Ether Programme completed it.
The Plan describes the variety of creative programmes developed by the YOS including those responsive to the 'hooks' of music or sport; content which focuses on employability, responding to serious youth violence or developing black male identity. Staff skills in delivering these initiatives are developed and supported by the clinical team and specialist staff from CAMHS and SALT, and underpinned by the systemic, trauma informed, and restorative approaches used across Children's Services in Southwark.
Listening to and involving young people remains a core component of how the YOS delivers its remit across prevention, intervention and sentencing and restorative activities. The plan references how this is achieved including the work of the Peer Navigators, a key ingredient in making links with other young people and gaining their views and gives comprehensive feedback on how young people experience the work of the YOS. Young people who graduated from the Ether Programme volunteered to mentor young people on subsequent sessions and overall 80% of young people who started the programme graduated and only one young person from the first intake reoffended. Southwark YOS also piloted the National Probation Service "Transitions to Adulthood" intervention for young people transferring to Adult Probation Services.  The Youth Justice Plan provides further examples of how innovative practice is shaping new ways of responding to young people, how in turn they engage with reparation activities that actively assist the community, and how an overall approach is delivered by a range of agencies to deliver an holistic response to young people. 
The plan gives details on the overall governance structure and specifics on how the Youth Crime Management Board (YCMB) has responded to the new inspection framework. It describes the work done to enable YCMB members to understand their particular responsibilities in relation to governance and leadership locally plus the ongoing work to ensure that knowledge and intelligence gained from other inspections or thematic reports are disseminated widely. 
There are full details of the financial income and expenditure and how these resources are targeted to local need and priorities. There is strong progress against two of the three key performance areas and the plan highlights those areas of good improvement such as the rate of First Time Entrants, which has shown successive falls over four quarters and the use of custody as a disposal which is at it's lowest ever level, demonstrating confidence in the alternatives to custody deployed by the YOS. The re-offending rate is an area for concern, particularly as analysis suggests that this cohort comprises a higher number of young people involved in drugs and weapons related crime. The YOS is analysing the underlying factors behind this to look at how best to respond and target this group of young people.  The Action Plan sets out the key priorities throughout 2019 and the beginning of 2020 including taking a whole family approach and Keeping Families Strong when building relationships with young peoples and their families.  A focus on data integrity will support targeted analysis of performance and further work to assist young people into employment will be key areas for improvement. 
Prevention and diversion from crime requires strong partnerships that respond positively to young people. Southwark is fortunate in the strength of the network responding to the multifaceted needs of this group of young people - police, probation and health, a Council staff group with a variety of skills as well as a group of 94 volunteers who deliver Community Panels or support direct work. These and the young people from the Peer Navigator programme collectively make a real difference to how the YOS meets the requirements of a range of key national indicators when delivering services to some of our most vulnerable and complex young people. The feedback gained from young people, the analysis of data and performance information and the intelligence collected against our local profile will be used to commission resources that are responsive to the needs of our communities which are reflected in the Council's vision for a fairer future.
Introduction
Southwark Council Plan 2018-2022, in its aspiration for a fairer future for all, through a safer community makes clear "everyone has the right to be safe and feel safe". It states
"we want to empower people, particularly young people, with the opportunities that they need to make positive choices and to stay away from crime and violence".
The work of Southwark's Youth Offending Service (YOS) is integral to this strategic ambition and promotes our approach of 'child first, offender second'. 
All agencies need to work together to improve outcomes for children and the  Crime & Disorder Act 1998 (s.40) places a statutory duty on each local authority, after consultation with the partner agencies, to formulate and implement an annual Youth Justice Plan, setting out:
• how youth justice services in their area are to be provided and funded
• how the youth offending team (YOT) or equivalent service will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out.
The Youth Justice Plan must  also be approved by the Youth Justice Board to fulfil grant requirements and guidance on the report (updated May 2019) recommends sections and issues to be addressed. This must include a review of progress against previous objectives and key national performance indicators as well as set priorities for the future. Multi-agency partners, young people and staff have been involved in these reflections, led by the Youth Crime Management Board (YCMB).
The 2018/2019 Youth Justice Plan identified  the  following key areas to maximise the likelihood of achieving reductions in re-offending and to support young people taking actions that would improve their lifestyles and avoid committing crime:
• Engaging young people and their families in their Orders and being explicit in the aim to reduce reoffending
• Reducing Serious Youth violence through assessing and addressing health needs and increasing the impact of a Restorative Justice approach
• Preparing young people for employment
• Improve data quality and performance information and ensuring the infrastructure is in place to resource YOS recording needs
• Reducing the number of young people entering the criminal Justice system
• Reducing the number of young people receiving a custodial sentence
• Reducing the reoffending rate of those subject to supervision from Southwark YOS
A thorough review is provided in Appendix A but the following provides an overview of major challenges and achievements.
Key challenges and achievements in 2018/19
This has been a challenging year for Southwark YOS with a number of high profile and serious weapon enabled injuries being inflicted on young people known (or previously known) to the YOS, including 3 deaths. The YOS management were involved in a number of high level multiagency meetings aimed at addressing this serious youth violence in the borough and this work continues into performance year 2019/20. Southwark YOS became centrally involved in a Youth Violence Cross-Party Panel review of borough responses to serious youth violence, and it was extremely encouraging that a young person associated with the YOS was chosen to be an "expert witness" for the panel.
The management of cases where a young person was stabbed was robustly reviewed by Southwark's Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB) sub-committee, with learning incorporated into YOS practice. The SSCB also commissioned an Extended Learning Review by the Home Office Violence and Vulnerability Unit in February 2019. This identified considerable strengths in our local leadership on addressing serious youth violence as well as making a number of recommendations to improve impact. Themes emerging from such reviews highlight the importance of family work on neglect, engagement in education and the intensive multi-agency response needed to manage risky behaviour by adolescents.
As such, a consistent theme for YOS staff, particularly over the summer of 2018, was the key task of keeping young people safe, and empowering them to develop effective safety plans in their lives. Where possible, attempts were made to undertake mediation in such cases and approaches involving parental input into devising safety plans undertaken. On a number of occasions, YOS staff successfully liaised with local housing staff to relocate a young person's entire family when professionals decided the risk present affecting the young person was too high to manage at the local level. 
This situation of relatively frequent incidents of assault occurring to young people caused significant stress to operational staff; work was undertaken to ensure appropriate support was given to affected staff, using approaches parallel to the trauma informed practice used with young people in the borough.
The YOS has celebrated the success of its school's knife crime intervention, funding for which has been obtained via a 3 year grant from the Greater London Authority. The YOS has undertaken interventions at 6 schools over 2018/19, including the Borough's Pupil Referral Unit. The participating schools identified children most vulnerable to using knives/ being injured by weapons, and using small groups and a listening focused approach, enabled young people to discuss how their lives were being shaped by threat of violence, and decisions they could make to improve their safety. All participating schools and participating young people have greatly appreciated this intervention. YOS staff have utilised the views of YOS associated young people (Peer Navigators) to assist in developing the intervention and making further improvements to it. Given the effectiveness of the intervention, it is pleasing that Lambeth YOS are now implementing a similar intervention at their local schools.
Further progress has been made in working with the schools exclusion agenda over the year, operating in partnership with specialist education colleagues. Joint work was undertaken to challenge exclusion decisions made by schools and to support parents identify the best alternative education facilities if the exclusion decision was upheld. YOS staff have successfully contributed to the rapid completion of Education Health and Care Plans for young people whose learning needs had previously not been identified. This emphasis on promptly addressing the learning needs of young people was extended into the custodial environment to ensure that specialist education provision was provided during their custodial sentence to several young people who had learning needs.  
The YOS has been keen to address the disproportionality agenda; this has been mainly demonstrated by ensuring that tailored programmes on identity have been run for young people of BAME ethnicity. The Ether programme was successfully run on 2 occasions, with excellent feedback received and extremely high levels of attendance by participants.  Recently, the YOS has partnered with the Black Heroes organisation, a local charity that is keen to spotlight successful local black role models; with the YOS the charity produced a film on Sam King, the first BAME mayor of Southwark (and in the UK) which was recently premiered at the YOS. The YOS has started partnership work with other groups who are affected by disproportionality, including the local Latin-American community, who face a range of adverse situations including a deficit of voluntary organisations offering services to this community. This work will be extended into 2019/ 20. 
The YOS has continued to develop the Peer Navigator programme over 2018/19 which encourages YOS clients to participate in service design and delivery. The number of young people supported to become peer navigators has continued to increase; currently around 10 young people have been trained in communication skills and trauma awareness, using these skills to facilitate contact with young people attending the YOS for the first time. An unexpected but welcome development has been the relatively frequent use of this group of navigators to offer their views to adult experts; as such they have attended workshops and conferences run by Ministry Of  Justice, Goldsmith's University Social Work students,  London Youth Court Magistrates and London Local Authority Assistant Directors. Mifta Choudhury, the founder of Youthink, the organisation that runs the Peer Navigator Service received a Butler Trust commendation in spring 2019 in recognition of his achievements in setting up the service.
In terms of YOS performance, the rate of first time entrants to the Criminal Justice system has steadily fallen throughout 2018/19, although the rate still remains high compared to other London Boroughs. Custody levels have continued to be low; this allows a fully personalised resettlement service to be provided to the few young people who did end up serving a custodial sentence. The main area of performance concern continues to be the reoffending rate, which has hovered just below 50% for most of the performance year. Substantial management attention has been paid to identifying who amongst the Southwark YOS cohort is reoffending and devising new approaches to preventing further offending by them.
This year has seen stability in terms of the structure of the YOS and overall governance, which has enabled the Youth Crime Management Board to concentrate its attentions on the newly defined inspection criteria from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Probation (HMIP). Several workshops were run to assist YCMB members to understand the new responsibilities; these sessions were appreciated, particularly by those recently appointed to the Board. As inspection reports were published the board has considered 
recommendations and in 2018/19 particularly focused on practice issues with Out of Court Disposals (OOCD).
Young person feedback on the work of the YOS
This data has been collected using a new questionnaire devised by Southwark YOS following the ending of the annual HMIP survey. It was facilitated by the YOS Peer Navigators (Jan - Mar 2019), thus reducing the likelihood of bias due to feedback being influenced by proximity to YOS staff.

Responses across all key areas were encouraging, and demonstrate that young people generally appreciate the various areas of support delivered by the YOS. Key achievements include all respondents (who believed that they had problems within these areas) believing they were helped to address alcohol issues, gaining advice on accommodation, and that they were assisted with family and relationship issues. This is a contrast to the last assessment, where family relationships were identified as an area for attention. A high proportion of young people who use drugs stated that they had received sufficient help and most also felt that they benefitted from advice received about not re-offending.
Areas for attention include Education Training and Employment (ETE) and stress (also identified last year). As before, it is important that the trauma based approaches to interventions are reinforced by further sessions on strategies to address ongoing feelings of stress experienced by young people. Whereas last year there was a 'nil response' about mental health, this year three of the five young  people  who said that  they needed  support  with mental health issues stated that they had not received enough support.  Whilst those young people who have accessed the YOS CAMHS services on a sustained basis are reported by relevant family and professionals to have benefitted from the inputs received, this is an area that we will review.
Overall, it is also encouraging that over three quarters of respondents stated that their YOS intervention had made them less likely to reoffend (significantly less likely in 39%).
The young people surveyed were also asked to identify issues that made it harder for them to take part in their YOS intervention. The three most common issues identified were:
• My learning needs
• I have to go through places I don't feel safe / am not allowed
• I find it difficult to explain things
These findings confirm the need to screen young people for speech and language needs, and develop interventions tailored to their individual learning styles / needs.  This feedback is being used to reinforce the importance of robust use of the Asset Plus assessment by YOS Officers and continued commission of in house speech and language therapist support.
Engagement of young people in reviewing practice is well embedded within the YOS and evidenced through the visibility of the Peer Navigators within the service. Their presence and co-delivery also enables a quick response to young people whose YOS experience is generally felt to be negative. Early mediation helps to identify whether changes need to occur in their interventions to enable them to feel that their involvement with the YOS is providing benefit.
From my involvement with the YOS it made me realise that I want to give something back and help others, I have just completed my order; I am waiting to go to a Advice guidance course to carry on doing what I am doing." Young person JT (18)
At the beginning I did not know really what to expect I just sat in the background  saying  nothing  as  I had no confidence or  self esteem, I was really  down.   But as the weeks went on I became more involved and through the help and support of other people at the YOS, I found confidence and have never looked back'. Young person JS (13)
Being involved with the YOS and Peer Support Navigator Network has given me the confidence to change my direction in life to work in this type of work helping people Young person TP (17)
Innovative Practice
Southwark YOS takes pride in piloting new interventions to explore whether new approaches can benefit young people and help them to avoid re-offending. During 2018/19, the following new services /interventions were piloted:
Increased prioritisation of the YOS's reparation services- during this year the YOS extended its reparation opportunities as prompt reparation was made a service priority, enabling young people to learn useful new skills and undertaking constructive tasks to benefit the community. A popular project has been the newly established bicycle restoration project operating in a central Southwark park, young people have enjoyed learning skills at this site and several have continued to volunteer after completing their Reparation hours. The YOS also piloted discrete Reparation projects for young women at local agencies providing prepared food for vulnerable adults. The YOS is keen that its range of reparation activities can attract the interest of all young people known to the YOS.
The Ether programme- This identity programme for BAME young people to assist them to explore their identity and to develop strategies to succeed was run for the 2nd time at Southwark YOS in winter 2018. This intervention aligns with Lammy's recommendations for public sector services to actively address the disproportionality agenda in their agency. Both programmes run have been noteworthy in that over 80% of the young people who commenced this programme successfully completed it, demonstrating that its contents were stimulating and relevant to participants. Several "graduates" of the first programme chose to volunteer to act as mentors of the 2nd group- this role was viewed as supportive by Wipers Youth, the programme developers. In relation to the first programme graduates who completed the programme one year ago, only one young person has re-offended, suggesting that the programme does support desistance in participants. Further tracking of reoffending rates of graduates of the programme will continue to ascertain whether these positive results are maintained, and a 3rd programme is aimed to be run in autumn 2019.
The Southwark YOS Integrated Offender Management (IOM) scheme - a collaboration between the YOS and local police to work more intensively together with the most criminally active and highest risk young people on the YOS's caseload. Staff from both agencies have reported excellent co-working occurring and the approach has been successful in helping young people reduce their offending levels in over 60% of the cases. Of the 18 young people whose involvement with the IOM scheme has ended, 44% had improved their lifestyles so that this level of surveillance was no longer required, and only 22% were removed as a result of being incarcerated.
Health and wellbeing interventions- The Health and Wellbeing worker was appointed in late 2017; since then they have worked alongside the CAMHS worker, Clinical practitioners, SALT workers and the Peer Navigator to jointly create a health and wellbeing hub; addressing health issues on a holistic basis; including the provision of trauma counselling, dietary and fitness advice and ensuring any communication issues for participating young people are addressed. The aim of achieving a joined up holistic set of interventions has certainly been achieved. Furthermore, the Peer Navigator mentoring service has recently been extended into the community, with satellite hubs operating at a local Boxing Club and at Millwall Football Club.
Southwark YOS Schools Anti-Knife crime intervention- In spring 2018, YOS staff delivered this intervention at 4 local schools, aiming to assist participants to develop strategies to stay safe in Southwark without needing to carry a knife. School pupils readily participated in the targeted intervention; and YOS staff highlighted the high percentage of young people in the groups who had witnessed traumatic violent events occurring in local streets. YOS staff helped each young person to develop their own personal safety plan, and to identify a trusted adult with whom they could discuss their ongoing safety.  This intervention was evaluated by Middlesex University, who consider the approach to be highly promising as a preventative measure. The project has now been funded for a further 3 years by the GLA; this longer term funding will enable  a sustained approach to be  taken  to delivering the intervention at a wide range of Southwark secondary schools and Academies; in addition the YOS can measure whether the intervention helps prevent participants from becoming involved in knife crime themselves. The YOS aims to extend the delivery of the intervention; the plan is for School's police based at the PRU to run an adapted version of the programme themselves in autumn 2019.
Zones of Regulation training- The Southwark Speech and Language Therapist (SALT) leads introduced this framework to increase self- regulation and develop emotional self- control at a whole YOS meeting in summer 2018. The  simplicity of the concept and relevance of the subject have been very warmly adopted by YOS staff; this framework has been used very effectively in 1:1 work with many young people, often combined with the long established "Talking Mats" tool used to assist communication with young people. The YOS aims to review the Zones of Regulation concepts in 2019 and hopefully develop them further.
Responses to HMIP individual and thematic reports- During the year, the Youth Crime Management Board commissioned Graham Robb, an experienced consultant on YOS issues, to discuss the new HMIP inspection framework, with particular reference to the role of the YCMB and its members. These sessions enabled Board members to identify their key responsibilities in terms of the YOS governance and leadership. The board are ensuring learning and recommendations from published inspections including thematic reports is implemented. The board most recently focused on HMIP advice on Risk of Harm assessments for young people subject to Out of Court Disposals and was satisfied that the local decision to use the Assetplus tool for these young people was appropriately robust.
Structure and Governance
The YOS is an integral part of the Family Early Help and Youth Justice Service within the 
Children's and Adults' Directorate to promote a child first ethos and practice.  The Strategic Director of Children's and Adults' Services has oversight of the YOS through management of the Director of Children and Families. As part of this divisional management team, the YOS has close links with colleagues from Family Early Help, Safeguarding, Care, Assessment and Intervention, Clinical, and Performance and  Quality Assurance Service areas. In addition, the YOS has maintained strong links with the Southwark Community Safety Division. Substantial joint operational and strategic planning occurs between senior managers in each department, particularly in 2018 around responses to serious youth violence. 
Governance of the YOS is provided by the  Youth  Crime  Management  Board (YCMB) which has accountability to the Safer Southwark Partnership (SSP) which has now  been subsumed with the Adult Safeguarding Board (see diagram below). This arrangement has now been in place since 2016 and is working effectively to ensure youth justice is responded to across partner agencies. 
The YCMB has reviewed its membership this year and used an independent consultant to self evaluate against the new inspection arrangements for leadership and governance. Areas for improvement for improvement have been identified and highlight the need for board members to have increased opportunities to actively engage with the youth justice environment in order to scrutinise and effectively challenge. 
Improving the accessibility of performance data to enable scrutiny has been another focus and a recent workshop on Performance data and work on OOCD provided more time for board members to review both practice and data, identifying further 'deep dive' tasks for the service to address FTE and reoffending.
Since the YOS transitioned to a new database system (Capita YJ) there have been significant operational issues which impacted on data submission requirements. These were escalated to Director of Commissioning through the board to ensure a robust response and successful compliance with grant conditions. Considerable effort and time has been required to ensure data can be used effectively and the revised performance framework includes dashboard info as well as the use of infographics.
Southwark YOS Governance arrangements 2019/2020

Resources and Value for money
Youth Justice Board Grant
The purpose of the grant has been revised through The Youth Justice Board for England and Wales (Amendment of Functions) Order 2015, article 2c. The monies are now given expressly "to make grants to local authorities and other persons for the purposes of the operation of the youth justice system and the provision of youth justice services" with a view to achieving the following outcomes:
• Reduction in youth re-offending;
• Reduction in the numbers of first time entrants to the justice system;
• Reduction in the use of youth custody
• Effective public protection, and
• Effective safeguarding
• Improving the safety, wellbeing and outcomes of children in the system
Junior Attendance Centre
The YOS receives a specific grant of £33,764 to cover delivery costs for this statutory programme and is required to comply with standard operating guidance. Southwark YOS launched a local model in April 2015 to comply with these regulations and developed a rolling programme of 6 sessions to take place on Saturday mornings to reflect the traditional model of JAC interventions, aimed at young people subject to higher end community sentences. This programme was revamped in 2017; it has been positive to achieve greater compliance using the new interventions being implemented. Helpful feedback was obtained from the Peer Navigator Group to assist in the programme redesign. The early evening programme aimed at Out Of Court Disposal cases has been particularly appreciated by participants; positive feedback from young people has been received concerning the varied programme offered, which has included inputs on the implications of offending, the importance of living healthily and developing appropriate assertiveness with peers. A further review of the JAC is currently being undertaken (spring 2019) with a view as to whether the interventions utilized could be further improved.
Joint resourcing arrangements
The Crime & Disorder Act 1998 requires partner agencies (police, health, Children's services, national probation service, education and health) to provide a nominated person to the YOS. The table below confirms the positive position as of April 2019. Regular meetings with these staff and representation at board level ensure the resources the YOS receives from these agencies are operating effectively. Adequately resourcing the YOS will continue to be a challenge for all partner agencies going forward and will be an issue for the YCMB to monitor. The YOS employs its own Education, Training and Employment worker who links closely with appropriate colleagues from education; and also uses funding to commission Speech & Language Therapists and a Health & Wellbeing worker. 
By agency20182019Local authority permanent staff51.146.4Local authority temporary staff2.13Secondee Probation11Secondee Police2.52.9Secondee Health (Mental health)1.52Secondee Health (Speech/language)0.80.6Students0.50Secondee Other11vacancies(2)TOTAL60.558.9The table below outlines partner contributions to the pooled budget
AgencyStaffing costsPayments in kindOther delegated fundsTotalPolice  £          
104,244.00   £      
104,244.00 Police and Crime Commissioner £                   
99,500.00    £        
99,500.00 Probation  £             
50,059.00  £                           
5,000.00  £        
55,059.00 Health  £             
98,983.00  £                         
83,000.00  £      
181,983.00 Local Authority £             
1,713,125.92   £                       
649,279.66  £  
2,362,405.58 YJB £                
612,463.00  £                            
-    £                           
3,764.00  £      
616,227.00 Other, GLA, LB Croydon, HMPPS £                     
3,000.00  £                            
-    £                       
256,248.00  £      
259,248.00 Total £             
2,428,088.92  £          
253,286.00  £                       
997,291.66  £  
3,678,666.58 Southwark YOS staffing by gender and ethnicity April 2019
Southwark YOS staffing and structure April 2019
YOS staffing has remained relatively stable over 2018/2019, with a strongly diverse workforce across the paid staff group. The YOS also has a large number of volunteers, who are used in a range of activities; providing mentoring support on a 1:1 basis, staffing Referral Panels and facilitating Reparation and Junior Attendance Centre sessions. Volunteers are predominately female and tend to be of BAME ethnicity. The YOS aims to recruit more male volunteers over 2019/20, whilst continuing to accept all offers of volunteering received from Southwark residents.
Ethnicity 
GroupStrategic 
ManagersOperational 
ManagersPractitionersAdministrativeSessionalStudentReferral
Order 
Panel
Volunteer  Other VolunteerTotalMFMFMFMFMFMFMFMFMFAsian or 
Asian 
British2121116Black or 
Black 
British1413712218281471Mixed2112345Chinese or Other1102White or 
White 
British11281721111141444Total1013143439010133411463312
8
Partnership Arrangements
As a member of the Divisional Management Team the YOS has close links with colleagues who have specific responsibility for safeguarding children and for children in care. This has also involved close working with the Access to Resources Team who identify relevant placements for children where the family situation becomes unsuitable or a remand is being considered. High risk young people are discussed at the monthly multi-agency YOS Risk Management panel and urgent issues are actioned by senior YOS and police managers as required. 
The YOS is a key partner in operational and strategic forums for missing children (education/care/home) child exploitation (MACE) and sexually harmful behaviour. Practice and knowledge on young people at risk or involved in county lines is shared though daily presence in MASH and work with the CSE and Missing Coordinator in Children's Social Care, plus the YOS police staff, the regional Rescue & Response Service, liaison with Red Thread at Kings College Hospital  and the National Referral Mechanism. The management of high risk young people, and those who are injured due to weapon attacks, is examined internally and monitored  through the YCMB and Safeguarding board structure; in addition referrals are made  to  the  local MAPPA as necessary.
YOS senior management meets regularly with key delivery partners to discuss operational issues and wider scale conversations examining the strategic direction to ensure common objectives and theory of change. Board members are encouraged to engage in practice events and understand the local context of work through presentations at meetings.
The health providers (CAMHS, clinical practitioners, health and wellbeing worker, sexual   health, substance misuse and Speech and Language interventions) meet with the YOS Senior management team on a quarterly basis to review progress. The YOS Head of Service meets monthly with the Youthink CEO to identify key current operational issues and less frequently to discuss progress against contract goals. The YOS management team meets with local Probation Service leads (both NPS and CRC) twice a year to discuss transitions issues; provision of small scale interventions e.g. drama, music production, film making is  reviewed immediately after an intervention has  been delivered. Regular meetings with local police managers examines the Out of court process and performance, also the joint management of those young people committing the highest rates of crime (via the Youth IOM scheme) and the highest risk young people who are also jointly managed by the multi-disciplinary Southwark Anti-Violence Unit (SAVU) and the police led HAMROW team.
Whilst is it encouraging that few Southwark young people go into custody,  this  low  rate makes building strong relationships  with local custodial units - for  Southwark,   largely Feltham and Cookham Wood  Youth Offending Institutes  and  Medway Secure Training Centre- difficult. However, it is the YOS aim to attend the institution where the young person is placed at the earliest opportunity and to make connections with the key staff at the institution who are responsible for the young person to ensure that joint planning for that young person starts quickly.
Risks to future delivery against the Youth Justice Outcomes
The YOS is monitored through three National Indicators, which relate to:
First Time Entrants (FTE):the number of young people entering the youth justice system for the first time (i.e. who receive a Youth Caution, Youth Conditional Caution or a sentence at court, including custody). In order to make this comparable across all local authorities, data is measured as a rate per 100,000 of the 10-17 year old population.
Use of custody: the number of custodial sentences per year, as measured by the rate per 1,000 of the 10-17 year old population.
Reoffending : the numbers of young people who reoffend out of a cohort entering the youth justice system in a year period, and how many new offences they commit. This is measured as a simple binary rate (reoffenders/total number of the YOS cohort) as well as two frequency rates (reoffences/total offenders in the whole YOS cohort and reoffences/total reoffenders in the whole YOS cohort).
Since the last Youth Justice Plan, there has been a change in the methodology used by the YJB to calculate reoffending rates, and data is now provided in two formats, as an annual and as a quarterly measure. It has been decided to use the annual statistics for this plan, as this is a more stable cohort.
All data below is the most recently published draft national data in May 2019.
First Time Entrants

Jan 14 - Dec 14Jan 15 - Dec 15Jan 16 - Dec 16Jan 17 - Dec 17Jan 18 - Dec 18Southwark654578511568451London427420410384283England409371328294236The FTE rate is on a downward trend (four successive quarters with an evidenced reduction) and is now at the lowest level ever for the borough. However Southwark's rate still remains significantly higher than other London Boroughs and second only to Lambeth (with a rate of 467 per 100,000 young people compared to Southwark's 451). In actual numbers this means that in the 2018 calendar year 109 young people received a substantive outcome  (from a caution to a court order) which approximate to 2 a week (out of a population of 24, 179 10 - 17 year olds). To reach the London level our target would be 68 young people per year as FTEs. 
Recent scrutiny by the YCMB acknowledged that the FTE rate can be influenced by policing practice and the use of Stop and Search. An increased police presence to address concerns about knife crime in the borough will influence arrests and requires us to review our diversionary alternatives to prosecution. YOS has agreed with health and police colleagues to develop a robust "Community Resolution plus" intervention that is proportionate and sufficiently intensive to continue to divert young people from the criminal justice system. This will focus on developing a new approach to cannabis smoking given the link to ongoing risk of offending and escalation to prosecution. Locating a member of YOS staff within the police station is another initiative being implemented with the aim of diverting low risk young people into alternative support at the earliest opportunity. 
The board has requested a more in depth analysis of the FTE cohort to understand the offending patterns and history of engagement. This aims to identify if there is risk within the quality of interventions, missed opportunities for earlier engagement (e.g. within school setting) or implications for decision making. The police led scrutiny panel for OOCD is now operational and  will also ensure there is consistency in decision making across Lambeth and Southwark. The Centre for Justice Innovation has also recently agreed to work with the YOS on an assessment of Southwark's FTE processes with a view to providing recommendations for further improvement action.
The YCMB is also aware that this work on reducing FTEs has to focus not just on diversionary practice but also how partners prevent young people engaging in criminal behaviour at an early stage. Family Early Help provides one avenue to identify need and risk and each school's single point of contact can be used to discuss the support available. The offer from FEH includes whole family support to young people at risk of permanent exclusion from schools and the Timpson Review will provide additional impetus for this joint work with our secondary Academies.  
In 2018 the YOS worked with Bubble Theatre and police to pilot a primary school intervention with a Year 6 cohort and then follow up sessions with a targeted group of pupils. A successful funding application to Challenge London will enable us to develop this 'Playing Safe' programme and further evaluate its impact and disseminate learning. This work builds on sessions developed in secondary schools which is being expanded with Lambeth YOS through a successful bid to the Young Londoners Fund. 
The Local Authority is also engaging with Integrate who are providing support alongside the Young Londoners Fund. This engagement aims to ensure any projects funded to deliver services  to prevent young people engaging in criminal activity, are working with the right groups and we make best use of community resources. 
Use of Custody

Apr 14 - Mar 15Apr 15 - Mar 16Apr 16 - Mar 17Apr 17 - Mar 18Apr 18 - Mar 19Southwark0.580.650.890.540.41London0.710.680.810.670.47England0.440.410.440.370.30After an increase in the custody rate in 16/17 (which relates to 4 more young people receiving a custodial sentence), the levels of custody use have subsequently declined. This rates at the lowest ever levels for the borough and below the London average.
This performance will be sustained by ongoing liaison with local sentencers to ensure they maintain full confidence in the range of interventions that Southwark YOS provides as an alternative to imprisonment. The YOS undertakes a full review of each young person who receives a custodial penalty to ascertain whether the Service could have done more (either in terms of prior intervention, or in terms of the recommendations made to the court)  to prevent the custodial sentence being imposed. 
Given that Southwark is a borough with significant serious youth violence concerns, the YOS is proud in achieving its low rates of custody. However how the system manages a high risk cohort within the community requires significant efforts by all partners to prevent harm and effective use of controls and sanctions. The review processes for serious incidents will include challenge to these arrangements. 
The YOS routinely works closely with Southwark looked after children's department to ensure high quality joint working occurs with all young people in care and there is joint planning. However we are concerned about the outcomes for young adults so have planned a more in depth review of the Aftercare population who are in custody. This will explore with Probation/CRC colleagues any practice or system issues that can be improved.
Re-offending Rates

Jul 12 - Jun 13Jul 13 - Jun 14Jul 14 - Jun 15Jul 15 - Jun 16Jul 16 - Jun 17Southwark45.7%45.3%47.6%51.2%49.6%London46.5%47.9%48.0%46.9%43.5%England41.7%42.9%42.6%41.9%40.1%The binary rate (proportion of the whole cohort to reoffend) has increased since  late 2015 (and since the methodology at the YJB changed). At its highest (October 2015 - September 2016) the rate was 53%, though this is slowly reducing. The rate is now significantly higher than the regional (9th highest in London) and national averages, and represents the biggest performance challenge for the YOS.
In response to a concerning increase in the binary reoffending rate the YOS has undertaken analysis to know which young people in its cohort reoffend and the types of offences they are committing as re-offences.  Southwark has learnt that young people with initial convictions for weapon or drug possession are most likely to re-offend and as a result has reviewed its interventions for this group of young people. It is particularly important to develop separate interventions for young people who do re-offend to prevent a pattern of offending behaviour occurring, and this is a key service goal for 2019/20. 
This increase in reoffending rates relates to a cohort of 240 young people on the YOS caseload in July 2016 - June 2017 and the 119 of them that subsequently reoffended within a year. This is in the context of a 10 - 17 population of 24,179 (June 2018 estimate). This reoffending cohort are the ones that need the most robust interventions within their orders but personalised so they focus on the unique needs of each individual teenager and what will help them grow out of crime. 
Given the context of an inner city borough, opportunities for young people to get exploited by others or led into committing crime are frequent and the YOS therefore needs to ensure its interventions fully take into account this local context. This cannot solely be a YOS response and so the YOS is working with multi agency partners to set up a criminal exploitation group (due to start July 19) to support young people most vulnerable to being criminally exploited by others. This will operate in conjunction with multiagency responses to gang and CSE harm already operating in the borough and alongside the recommendations from the Extended Learning Review. 
Re-offending per offender

Jul 12 - Jun 13Jul 13 - Jun 14Jul 14 - Jun 15Jul 15 - Jun 16Jul 16 - Jun 17Southwark1.61.471.391.571.64London1.421.571.631.671.6England1.371.481.531.611.6The frequency rate shows that whilst the number of re-offences per offender is increasing both in London and nationally, Southwark's levels tend to fluctuate.  Levels are currently in line with the London (18th highest and 8th of 11 in its most similar family group) and national average.
A more useful data set is the number of reoffences per re-offender as shown below. This shows that the young people who reoffend commit multiple offences during the follow up year - on average approximately 3. These multiple offences can sometimes occur in one offending episode (e.g. stealing a moped can often result in more than one offence) rather than separate incidents. 
Improvements to the case management system will now enable us to use the reoffending live tracker tool we can monitor this activity and remind staff to review plans and change frequency of contact or interventions as required to prevent multiple offending episodes. The tool will also be used to analyse the patterns of offending in the historic cohort to inform practice changes required. 
Re-offences per reoffender

Jul 12 - Jun 13Jul 13 - Jun 14Jul 14 - Jun 15Jul 15 - Jun 16Jul 16 - Jun 17Southwark3.53.252.933.063.3London3.053.273.393.563.68England3.33.463.653.833.98Here we see that Southwark is significantly below the national and London averages, with
3.3 reoffences per reoffender.
Southwark ranks 26th of 31 boroughs for this indicator, and is the third best performing borough in our most similar family group.
Southwark YOS approach to service quality assessment
As part of their Quality Assurance and Performance framework, the YOS has a schedule for local audits and practice observations.  As required within Children and Families these have included  thematic  audits covering child neglect,  Looked After  Children,  and the  quality  of  work with children where domestic abuse has been identified  within the  family. YOS specific audits have recently focused on the quality of Out of Court Work and the standard of interventions undertaken with children made subject to statutory Court Orders. The YOS also undertook a thematic audit on the quality of PSRs presented to the local Youth Court. 
This pattern of regular case audits being undertaken across the range of YOS cases will continue into 2019/20 with learning disseminated through monthly cross service performance meetings. 
An early aim for the new performance year is to examine the quality of victim, Restorative Justice and Reparation work. The YOS is also part of the London sector led improvement group and will be engaging with colleagues for peer review and has plans for working with a local YOS to hold a peer audit. 
The diverse needs of Southwark young people and the Southwark YOS response
As a Local Authority, Southwark takes pride in empowering its residents to achieve. This aim can only be successful if the diverse backgrounds, needs and strengths of the communities within Southwark are fully addressed. Data is regularly used to target resources to ensure best impact and highest needs or risks are addressed.  For example youth crime data can be used to target hotspots and this has led to the Breaking Barriers Southwark delivering on various estates in the Borough where deprivation is highest and where young people's level of committing crime is high. Such targeted responses to support those living in these areas are provided, conducted by the Community Safety, Leisure, Education and Children's Departments of the Local Authority. 
Comparison of  the local 10 -17 population ethnicity and the YOS caseload shows a disproportionate number of BAME young people are involved in offending (75% compared to 66% and this rises for the custodial cohort (78%).  This disproportionality is historic and the YOS continues to develop its work on masculinity and identity to ensure BAME young people's needs are recognised. The Peer Navigator programme provides an excellent model of skilling up those who have been through the YOS to then influence their peers; and the Ether programme and recent Black heroes project are additional focused interventions.  It remains crucial for all direct work with YOS clients to open up dialogues and promote the positive strengths of race, ethnicity and culture given the importance of adolescence in developing identity.
Institutional racism has been addressed through the YOS working directly with sentencers to ensure that unconscious bias is minimized at the court setting, and hopes to undertake similar work with local police in 2019/20. 
Local analysis has identified the Latin-American community within Southwark as potentially requiring additional support. As a group who have arrived  in  the borough relatively recently, and often either one or both  parents  do not  speak English, many of their children are appearing to  become very vulnerable  to exploitation  from others and are disproportionally involved in becoming subject to YOS interventions. The YOS has linked with the Children's Society to pilot a supportive service to Latin-American parents; we hope to start this group in summer 2019.
Action Plan 2019/20
The following actions have been identified by stakeholders, YOS officers and young people from the review of services to address priority areas and performance against the key national indicators:
Priorities 19/20Intended OutcomesActionsEngage young people and families in their orders and be explicit in the aim to reduce offending and its impactFamilies and young people are clear about expectations, consequences and support available and collaborate in plans and actions
Young people engage with their orders and breach is avoided
All LAC young people receive an enhanced service which minimises criminalisation 	and offendingImprove engagement with families and delivery of a whole family approach aligned with the Keeping 
Families. Strong strategy, particularly addressing needs of 16/17 year olds for sustainable relationships with carers.
Reinvigorate systemic practice to drive a whole family approach through induction, ongoing training and review of practice. 
Review existing provision and develop new interventions for knife possession (particularly second offences) and cannabis possession.
Increase responsiveness in prevention and diversion work and take advantage of the 'teachable moment'.
Improve liaison with CARE staff to ensure joint approach and evidence of joint planning to prevent offending of LAC young people.
Complete deep dive analysis with NPS and CRC of Care leavers in custody and their transition to adult services. 
Develop a youth to parent violence intervention.Reduce serious youth violence through robust risk management, assessing and addressing health needs and increasing the impact of a restorative justice approachIndividual needs are appropriately assessed and addressed for those young people at risk or involved in serious youth violence
Young people's needs are understood and effective interventions delivered to achieve improvements in well being
Basic needs are met to 
enable offending to be 
reducedEvaluate the effectiveness of trauma based work impacts on outcomes for young people and tailor the YOS offer to ensure its relevance.
Extend YOS Health Offer via regular health workshops delivered by
Health and Wellbeing officer.
Review delivery of actions in Southwark's Knife crime strategy.
Review impact of the YOS IOM scheme to provide an intensive service to the most risky young people.
Develop response to recommendations in Extended. 
Learning Review.
Evaluate effectiveness of work in schools through funding from GLA and Challenge London. 
Collaborate with LEAP to deliver further Conflict Resolution programmes and seek resources to fund this work.Prepare young people for employmentYoung people can access employment opportunities
Social skills are increased Young people get involved in peer Mentoring and supportMaintain links with SEND colleagues and reapply for quality mark
Develop clear routes to employment:
Way into Work programme
Peer Navigators 
Volunteering
Work placements
Paid internships
Apprenticeships
Sessional work
Increase the use of Reparation and Unpaid Work Orders to develop new skills for young people.
Priorities 19/20Intended OutcomesActionsImprove data quality and performance information and ensure the infrastructure is in place to resource YOS 
needsMore informed allocation of resources and understanding of what works plus value for moneyCapita One YJ database fully implemented and ensure YJ reports are accurate. If operational problems persist, escalate to CHAD Board for resolution.
Implement the performance management framework increasing use of visual feedback, dashboard,  infographics and cases studies to inform YCMB and staff of key performance criteria. Utilise the re-offending toolkit or similar to inform resource allocation.
Use other YJB tools as made available to extend data quality across the YOS, particularly the disproportionality toolkit. Ensure regular audits of case work are undertaken, strengths and areas for development are identified and passed onto staff and remedial action with action plans monitored at monthly performance meetings attended by staff of all grades.Reduce the number of young people receiving a custodial sentenceLess young people experience time in custody and risk is managed within the communityReview of custodial cases 18/19, reoffending rates and journey, to understand reasons for custody and disseminate learning. Reduce the number of young people entering the Youth Justice 
SystemMore young people are diverted to a non offending lifestyleMonthly monitoring of local data against targets and feedback to staff/police. 
Improved routes to FEHYJ from schools
Improve information sharing and targeted work with schools based police officers.
YOS team Managers present in MASH daily to input to decisions re prevention work and accept early intervention cases particularly with regard to drug dealing, weapon carrying, and gang association cases prior to police involvement. Evaluate MASH effectiveness.
Work with SILS to target interventions with at risk excluded young people Develop a response to the Lammy disproportionality report recommendations within the youth justice system and extend use of Ether programme.
Create a brief solution informed approach to OOCD casework Implement model to base a YOS Officer in police station to divert low risk offenders.Reduction in the reoffending rateLess harm caused to victims and young people desist from criminal behaviour more quicklyProvide monthly reports to staff to identify re-offenders and discuss
actions in monthly management meetings.
Review use of toolkit to analyse data is the most cost effective way Review interventions as planned to ensure they address the appropriate offences and systemic practice continues to be effective.
Ensure there is a wrap around offer to young people and families that focuses on risk factors and develops their soft skills to make them employable and motivated for employment.
New interventions devised for those young people identified 
as most likely to reoffend e.g. those with a high level of cannabis use and routine knife carriers.
Expand girls project to local schools
Review the effectiveness of the YOS-adult probation 	Southwark Youth Justice Plan 2019-20	27

Priorities 19/20Intended OutcomesActionsservices intervention to ascertain whether this approach should be supported moving forwards.
Extend use of the Junior Attendance Centre resource for both Out of Court disposals and those subject to Court orders.

Youth Justice Plan approval 2019/20
Name: Jenny BrennanRole Chair of Youth Crime Management BoardSignature: 

Appendix A Engaging young people and their families in their orders and be explicit in the aim to reduce reoffending
The YOS has continued to utilise a systemic approach to interventions that it introduced in 2014; this approach readily supports family based work in the YOS.  Newly starting staff (and some long established members) benefitted from workshops over summer 2018 by the clinical practitioners from the council's Clinical Service on the basic principles of systemic practice. Staff received further training during the year on developing a trauma informed approach to working with young people; thus enabling a more consistent method of intervening with young people to be taken across the YOS.
As the year progressed, the YOS has taken a greater focus (alongside other services within the council's Children and Families Division) on working collaboratively with families. It participated in the highly successful event "Keeping Families Strong" in February  2019 where parents known to children's social care and  early  help services (including  YOS parents) were brought together to identify what factors keep their families strong. Whilst the YOS lead for improving child and parent relationships has remained with the YOS's specialist clinical practitioners, it is now expected that working with the whole family should be the standard approach to tackling all young person's offending, and practiced by all staff working within the YOS. Further parenting work was undertaken in the setting up and running  of a group for parents affected by serious violence; the participating individuals came together having experienced the death  or  serious injury  of  a  young  member of their  family. This group has had the opportunity to state their views about adolescent violence prevention to various decision makers within the council, including the Lead Councillor for Community Safety, and is seen to be a key voice.  The YOS intends to extend its development of effective family interventions as part of an enhanced family strategy in 2019/2020.
The YOS has continued to seek feedback from young people about their experiences of interventions delivered by the YOS; these review sessions have largely been conducted by our Peer Navigators, young people who have successfully completed their statutory contact with the YOS and who are subsequently trained in communication skills and trauma awareness to become effective peer mentors. The Peer Navigators have also continued to deliver informal training to sentencers and Borough decision makers; in addition one young person has very successfully participated as a youth representative on the Southwark Youth Violence Cross-Party Panel, a council led approach aiming to identify  what can be  done locally to reduce youth violence.
A range of interventions were delivered by the YOS over the year, all were conducted with the aim of reducing re-offending rates and all were set up as being sensitive to the  needs  of the diverse communities of Southwark. The Ether group, an intervention designed to assist BAME young people gain greater self-identity, self-understanding and hence become empowered to make more constructive choices in their lives, was run for the second time; similar to the first cohort, attendance and levels of participation by those present in the group sessions has been extremely impressive. This level of commitment continues to demonstrate the intervention's relevance to its participants. Mid and long term follow up of the young people who attended the groups is being undertaken to ascertain whether the group participation helped those attending to reduce their rates of offending.  A third Ether programme will certainly be run in 2019/20. 
Other noteworthy successful interventions have been further running of the Creative Voices groupwork intervention, delivered by partner agency London Bubble.  The  aim  was to utilise London Bubble's We Need to Act On process which embeds young people's social concerns and observations into the  creation of relevant  and interactive  theatre.  Addressing the issues young people face in their  daily  lives whilst this  project has been  run before  at the YOS, the level of enthusiasm and committed participation demonstrated by those who attended in early 2019 was the highest yet  achieved.  YOS staff have continued to run conflict resolution groups, comprising of young people who are already in the same peer group; and whose peer friendship has been used as the basis of the groupwork undertaken.
The interventions tailored for young women have continued to be delivered. Again, attendance at these groups has been impressively high, clearly showing the importance participants felt their programmes were to their ongoing well-being. Numbers of young women being supervised by the YOS (either on a prevention or sentenced basis) has increased during 2018/19 thus the amount of YOS intervention delivery has had to increase accordingly as a response.
The level of mental health provision to the YOS has improved as the year progressed, the 
YOS now has a full complement of CAMHS staff with both a Senior CAMHS worker and 2 CAMHS workers (p/t). Given this situation, we can now jointly plan to implement a more proactive approach to addressing the mental health needs of young people known to the YOS. CAMHS are also keen to integrate more family work into their interventions so that their service becomes increasingly accessible to families. The YOS has continued to benefit from robust clinical practitioner input; their commitment to ensuring that systemic practice was consistently applied across the YOS and their expertise in working with family dynamics has been hugely beneficial for day to day YOS operations.
The Junior Attendance Centre continued to be used as originally piloted in its new format in 2017/18. The programme was reviewed and improved and is now targeted both at low level offending young people as part of the out of Court Disposals (OOCD) set of responses in the YOS and separately, at higher seriousness offending for  young people subject to  court Orders  including Intensive Supervision and Surveillance (ISS). Peer Navigators were also introduced into assisting the delivery of the intervention, accompanied by a very motivated volunteer worker from the YOS.
Improving links with the council's services for children in care has been a priority for the year and one achievement has been the establishment of regular meetings occurring involving the 2 respective Heads of Service. The YOS now shares monthly young person custody data with the Care Service, so that both areas are aware of young people who are attaining children in care status due to the length of time they have spent on custodial remand. It is planned for a joint management meeting to occur in late summer 2019 to further improve interdepartmental knowledge and working relationships. This is a key aim for the YOS to improve links across the council's children's social care services. This will also involve stronger collaboration around the early help offer; ensuring that referrals are quickly processed and the best placed agency provides a service to the young person. The "no wrong door" approach to receiving referrals from external agencies is welcomed by the YOS, which realises the importance of providing a fast response to vulnerable young people. A further achievement during this year has been the regular attendance of senior managers from both the Care and Safeguarding services at the monthly YOS multiagency Risk Management Panel.  
 The YOS has also successfully piloted 2 new interventions using partners from the local area. These have delivered film making and healthy nutrition opportunities, giving participants the opportunity to learn more about how to communicate using the medium of film and the importance of ensuring that their food consumption is balanced and healthy; this intervention has neatly complemented the work of the YOS Health and Wellbeing Officer. The delivering agencies are both led by young men who have had previous involvement with the criminal justice system in their teenage years and so can quickly relate to the young people who attend their interventions.
Southwark YOS was pleased to pilot a new locally designed National Probation Service 
"Transitions to Adulthood" intervention for young people transferring to Adult Probation Services. The aim of  the  Intervention  is  to make  the  transfer  process smoother and less unsettling  for young  people  and  also to ensure  young  people  realise at an early point in the transfer process the  differing  expectations  adult  probation  will expect of them  after  their  transfer.  It  was useful  that  the  Southwark  Peer  Navigators gave helpful feedback to the  intervention  creators;  this  feedback  was  incorporated  into the final intervention product. The Probation  secondee  has  readily  delivered  the intervention and found it to be a useful tool; during 2019/20 the  numbers  of  young  people going through  this  transfer  process  should  be sufficiently  large  to assess the intervention's effectiveness. A good summary of the intervention's effectiveness is feedback received from a participant BB "YOS sometimes ran the race for me, but Probation were there at the finish line cheering me on".
The one area that had been planned for 18/19 that has not been achieved is the implementation of brief solution therapy- the YOS remains keen to deliver this intervention as a method of working with young people subject to short term statutory sentences such as Youth Conditional Cautions, and anticipates delivering a training package for relevant staff in 19/20.
Reducing Serious Youth violence through assessing and addressing health needs and increasing the impact of a Restorative Justice approach.
Southwark has the highest numbers of knife possession offences in London and amongst the highest numbers of young people injured by weapons; hence reducing the levels of serious violence has to be the highest priority for this YOS. As a consequence, the YOS has undertaken a range of activities to tackle this issue, taking into account the helpful HMIP thematic (autumn 2017) on managing serious youth violence. The YOS fully agrees with the Inspectorate's findings that young people involved in serious violence tend to have traumatised past histories as this is our findings too- hence the YOS's emphasis on delivering interventions that directly address trauma. Refresher training on working with trauma was provided to staff during the autumn of 2018. Further studies on Serious Youth violence, and the recommendations/ findings within these reports have been taken up by the YOS e.g. Youth Violence Interim report 2018.
The first level of tackling youth violence is at the prevention level. During this year, the YOS secured GLA funding to continue to run its successful knife awareness programme at Southwark schools for 3 years starting early 2019; 4 schools received this intervention in spring term 2019. The YOS has been commissioned to work alongside Lambeth YOS who have also been funded to deliver this intervention. The theory base used involves building trusting relationships with the attendees and then conducting a focused discussion on how violent incidents had affected them. The aim of the intervention is to assist participants to create alternative ways of staying safe without carrying a knife and to help each young person to identify trusted adults with whom they could discuss their personal safety. This intervention was warmly welcomed by staff and pupils at all the schools where it was originally piloted and positive feedback from educational establishments in 2019 has also been received. More details about this intervention are given in the Innovation section of this plan. Whilst providing this intervention, YOS staff have developed good relationships with schools' police officers and further joint working with these colleagues is anticipated, particularly around reducing unnecessary pupil exclusions.
The NHS funded health and wellbeing role has developed during 2018/19. This role assists young people to consider all aspects of their health, including personal safety, recovering from trauma and developing physical wellbeing and fitness.  This approach involves significant use of partner agencies, including substance misuse partners to address drug misuse, community boxing organisations to provide constructive leisure activities that also improve physical fitness and as mentioned above, other partners to give advice on healthy diets. The post holder has run regular workshops with both staff and young people to extend knowledge around the health and wellbeing agenda, and most recently has extended the wellbeing "offer" to offering a wider range of sports activities, in conjunction with colleagues from Southwark's Sports and Leisure Department. It is also encouraging that the wellbeing agenda at the YOS is being strongly supported by community health colleagues, including CAMHS, who have offered advice and support to the YOS worker.
The YOS continued to hold monthly multi-agency Risk Management Panel, where partners pool their knowledge and expertise to develop risk management strategies for the highest risk young people known to the YOS. This panel has been particularly important for Southwark YOS in 2018/19; sadly, in common with other parts of London, Southwark has experienced an increase in the number of young people seriously harmed in violent incidents; during the year 2 young people known to the YOS were killed through sustaining knife wounds, and a further 14 young people were injured in weapon enabled incidents.
The YOS has chosen to retain the YJB's criteria for undertaking Critical Learning Reviews (CLRs), thus it is significant to note that in 2017/18 there were 6 CLRS produced by the YOS, in 2018/19 there have been 16, a substantial increase. YOS staff have understandably been emotionally affected by the levels of violence experienced by young people; considerable time and reflection over summer and the  Autumn in 2018 (when most of the assaults took place) have been spent by YOS managers to assist staff to address the trauma they have experienced. The CLRs continue to be discussed at the quarterly Southwark serious case review sub-group of its Safeguarding Children Board to ensure prompt high level independent oversight; feedback from this sub-group is then fed back to YOS management and operational staff to ensure that learning obtained from these incidents is shared across the YOS.
The YOS has continued to run weapon awareness programmes for all young people subject to statutory contact with the YOS; both a modified, shortened version suitable for short term interventions required for young people subject to an Out of Court disposal and the full stay safe programme for those subject to court imposed orders.
YOS Management staff have regularly attended community meetings organised to tackle local knife crime, including the Southwark Anti-Knife Community Forum, and the Southwark Safer Neighbourhood Board. The YOS has a staff member seconded from the Southwark AntiViolence Unit (SAVU), a multi-disciplinary team that works with young people (up to age
25) who are identified as being at highest risk of becoming victims or perpetrators of violence.
YOS staff have also participated in multi-agency strategic meetings and reviews set up to address serious youth violence including an Extended Learning Review Undertaken by the Home Office Violence and Vulnerability Unit in February 2019, and the ongoing council led Youth Violence Cross-Party Panel, which has also involved a Peer Navigator attending to ensure a young person's voice is heard.  Recent liaison  has occurred with Health  Managers to ascertain whether a joint approach (using the Public Health approach) to addressing the serious youth violence  issue could be undertaken,  with a view  to delivering  early interventions and diverting suitable young people away from the criminal justice system this could be implemented in Autumn 2019.
A further key development for the YOS was its identification of the local Latin-American community as an ethnic grouping particularly vulnerable to being exploited or subjected to violence; due to English not being the first language and also being  relatively  recent arrivals to the borough, and where services are still being established to meet this group's needs.
The YOS, in conjunction with other sections of Children's services departments, has established a working partnership with the Children's Society to set up meetings with leaders and support workers from this community, with the aim of developing a plan of intervention to support the community in summer 2019.
The YOS and the police IOM scheme has continued to thrive. This scheme ensure high levels of resources are jointly allocated to a small cohort of young people (12-14) whose risk of harm/likelihood of reoffending is identified as being very high. This scheme is working very effectively and positive results are achieved; young people know that they are of particular attention to both agencies and frequently amend their behaviour as a result, so far, over 50% of the cohort have been removed from the scheme due to good progress. The scheme has also been characterised by high quality joint work being undertaken by YOS and police staff across the Borough. Due to its success, this scheme will be replicated in Lambeth in 2019/20.
Throughout the year, the YOS has detected an increasing number of young people becoming involved in county lines activities. The YOS has made good use of both national resources such as the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) and local services including the Police Vulnerable Adolescent Team (VAT), the commissioned Rescue and Response service and the Local Authority's lead for child sexual exploitation. The YOS has recently agreed to hold a monthly panel meeting with the police to discuss individuals most at risk of being criminally exploited; this meeting will also include representatives from the local PRU and the council's safeguarding team. The YOS looks forward to further developing joint responses to this very serious issue that puts many local young people at substantial risk of harm.
During 2018/19, Southwark YOS partnered with Leap to run 2 Conflict resolution programmes, as part of a pilot initiative. Whilst there were teething issues obtaining sufficient numbers of referrals of young people to attend the groups, once the groups were run, it was found that that the programme was helpful and participants actively engaged with the aims and content of the intervention. Provided funding can be retained, it is hoped that a further 2-3 groups will be run during 19/20, one at least over the critical summer holiday period.
The YOS's approach to becoming a Restorative YOS has been maintained, ensuring that all young people are involved in full discussions about the impact of their actions on their victims; where appropriate, victims are brought into either direct or indirect contact with their offender. The YOS was successful in retaining its Restorative Justice Quality award for 2018/2019; it is important that victim perspectives are central to all work undertaken with young people at the YOS. In terms of Restorative Practice, the YOS was able to contact 35 out of the 36 victims identified by the police; all 35 victims expressed satisfaction with the service they received from Southwark YOS. 18 victims wanted to have contact with the young person who had offended against them; 11 had direct contact in some form of face to face meeting and 7 indirect contacts through the production of victim apology letters.
In terms of outstanding tasks, the YOS has not had sufficient time to review its Intensive Supervision and Support provision. This will be a key task for 2019/20.
Preparing young people for employment/ training
The links between the YOS and Southwark's SEND department have continued to be excellent, with regular meetings held to discuss matters of mutual interest. This achievement has been built on the successful application for the AYM/AIM award for leadership in SEND collaboration in June 2018. The joint work undertaken to collect evidence to obtain the award accurately reflected the ongoing professional links between the departments; regular meetings occurred between respective leaders and ongoing contact being maintained between operational staff to ensure the best educational outcomes for vulnerable young people. The YOS was also able to participate helpfully in the 2018 Southwark SEND inspection more details are provided later in this report.
The YOS continues to prioritise its attentions on young people who are not in employment, education or training (NEET) - a key target was established in 2017 that no young person should complete their intervention at the YOS whilst remaining NEET. A RAG assessment process was installed to enable staff to identify how much work was required with an individual to make them  to be job and training course ready; the YOS's Education and Employment Advisor holds a one to one session with every young person assessed as "red" on the employment readiness scale and then creates an individual plan for each person to develop their employability skills. This approach ensures that those most requiring assistance to access employment and training opportunities receive the best help to do so.
Significant attention has been paid to the vulnerabilities of young people excluded from mainstream education. The YOS has been keen to be part of this agenda, offering a diversion programme for young people at risk of being excluded, and developing links with key staff, particularly schools police, at Southwark Academies.  The YOS has developed very strong links with the local PRU, both at operational and managerial levels, and also with key managers within the Alternative Provision department.  In February 2019, The YOS Quality Assurance Lead produced a detailed report analysing exclusion patterns from mainstream educational establishments; this report has been very well received and utilised across Southwark Children's services.
The YOS ran several "way into work" groupwork programmes aimed at assisting 
participants to become more personally skilled at approaching the employment market. This included addressing communication issues, developing the importance of being punctual and achieving confidence in operating in a group environment.  Several employment workshops were run during the year which brought local employers and trainers to the YOS to meet with young people; they were able to offer specialist advice to attendees.  For interested young people, opportunities were provided for them to become Peer Navigators at the YOS by the provision of specialist inputs to them on communication Skills and trauma awareness. The YOS continue to run Goldseal music creation workshops, again with the ultimate aim of helping participants develop both useful skills which also gives them useful contacts within the music business.
The Peer Navigator scheme continues to offer motivated young people the opportunity to learn communication and basic trauma awareness skills and to utilise these skills in practice; this has been a  very successful route for  those attending  to obtain  paid employment in related job fields, such as paid mentoring or  youth  work and/or  facilitating  access to University degree courses.
The YOS consciously identified that its Unpaid Work and Reparation activities should teach participants useful skills in painting, decorating, carpentry, horticulture and animal husbandry. Reparation opportunities have been increased by the additional provision of partnering with a bicycle repair workshop, thus extending the range of skills a young person can learn whilst undertaking reparation. The YOS has emphasised the importance of completing reparation activities early in a young person's contact with the Service; this emphasis has increased the number of young people referred and the attendance levels at the various sites.
It has not been possible to identify a mechanism whereby young people can obtain recognised qualifications for their participation in activities run by the YOS; this remains a task to be completed in 2019/20.
Improve data quality and performance information and ensure the infrastructure is in place to resource YOS recording needs
The database Capita YJ has gradually improved  in terms of operational  effectiveness  and so staff have been able to complete Asset Plus assessments using Capita YJ without experiencing frequent problems; a welcome development.  Further progress has been made in terms of the number of performance reports that can now be run, this enables the YOS Quality Assurance Lead to generate useful data that has been shared with both managers and operational staff in the YOS. For example, the YOS is now able to readily identify who is reoffending and how they are doing so; in 2017/18 this task was much more difficult and time consuming to undertake.
A new performance framework has been introduced which has been warmly received. It is effective as it clearly identifies key performance criteria and provides the opportunity to comment on each criterion. Also a performance dashboard has been introduced which highlights performance on key local issues which are not measured by the YJB, e.g. percentage of young people referred to reparation or those referred to clinical service resources.
The YOS runs monthly performance meetings where staff from across the service discuss key performance issues, each YOS team's performance is identified so that strategies and actions that have caused performance improvements are shared and adopted across the YOS. Recent areas of focus include improving the timeliness of asset plus assessments, ensuring gang association amongst young people is accurately recorded on the Capita database and that referrals to partner agencies are similarly recorded. This approach is achieving good buy in from all attendees and we expect to see significant performance improvements as a result.
However, a key operational challenge has been the inability to transmit key performance data to the YJB via connectivity, which is a key requirement for Southwark to receive its annual grant from the YJB.  Significant liaison work has been undertaken by YOS staff, and IT colleagues from Southwark, Capita and the YJB to resolve this issue. It is believed that this important problem has now been resolved, and hopefully data required quarterly will be transferred successfully to the YJB via the connectivity process.
Southwark YOS has been keen to use the various toolkits that the YJB provides, particularly the re-offending and disproportionality toolkits which could strongly inform practice across the YOS. However, these toolkits have not yet been used systematically; this is a key task to be achieved for 2019.
The YOS has been active in preparing for inspections and worked hard for the SEND inspection of June 2018 to ensure that all cases addressed SEND issues where relevant. It was pleasing that Ofsted and the CQC recognised the strong SEND/YOS links in their summary report. The YOS has also been actively considering how to measure good performance in the Out of Court disposal arena (OOCD), utilizing the recently published HMIP standards for this area and paying attention to the OOCD thematic on best practice in this area which was published in early 2018.
A feature for 2018/19 has been to ensure case audits are undertaken regularly with the aim being firstly to identify performance within key areas and then to agree areas  that need  improving and drawing up Action Plans to address these deficits. These audits have included both departmental and YOS driven local audits; those conducted during the year included analysing the quality of work undertaken where neglect was identified as a family issue, also cases where domestic violence was considered to be a key family dynamic, an audit of OOCD work and a separate analysis of cases where a statutory court sentence had been imposed. Finally, a calibrating exercise was undertaken by managers to ascertain how consistent our approaches to evaluating PSRs currently are operating.
Reducing the number of young people entering the criminal Justice system
This has been a key priority for the YOS during 2018/19; whilst the First Time Entrant (FTE) rate has gradually declined, it still remains high compared to other parts of London.
Considerable liaison work has been undertaken with the police to ensure the best Out of
Court Disposal (OOCD) decisions are made. Southwark YOS took part in an OOCD Scrutiny exercise in late 2018; interestingly external evaluators assessed that Southwark took an overall comparatively lenient approach to cases being considered for an OOCD.
The other key issue to be noted is an overall decrease (in common with other South London YOSs) in the number of young people going though court processes; it is a working hypothesis that charging decisions made by police and CPS are diverting more young people to the OOCD service, increasing numbers of OOCD cases and potentially the offence type of the OOCD cohort. More research is needed to examine this development in 2019/20.
The excellent working relationships with local sentencers has also been retained despite the relocation of court operations to Bromley in late 2018. Sentencers have stated publicly that they have full confidence in Southwark's OOCD suite of interventions. This has been a true dialogue; in summer 2018, YOS Peer Navigators and court sentencers conducted a useful meeting where issues of mutual interest such as how to respond to knife crime were thoroughly discussed.
The YOS was pleased to receive the HMIP thematic on OOCDs published in early 2018; this thematic has provided useful guidance on best practice around managing OOCDs. For Southwark, the emphasis has been to ensure prompt responses being implemented for young people who are placed on an OOCD and also to ensure that joint planning is undertaken between young people and their case officer to determine the details and sequencing of activities to be undertaken together.
The YOS has also appreciated the HMIP standards for OOCD cases (published spring 2018) which the YOS is now using to critique current practice. This work in developing best practice in OOCD practice has been continued into 2018/19 and an audit of OOCD practice undertaken in late summer 2018. The Southwark YCMB has received 2 separate presentations on OOCD delivery over the year and useful feedback about the YOS approach has been received from this Governance Board.
The YOS has been able  to provide  specialised interventions for OOCD cases, including the successful introduction of the Junior Attendance Centre intervention,  more groups  for young women, and separate activities being delivered over the summer holiday period. YOS managers have continued to attend MASH on a daily basis, and where appropriate, have arranged referrals for prevention interventions to occur to the YOS from that multi-agency resource.
Links with Southwark's Pupil Referral Unit (SILS) have been further extended during 2018. Many pupils at the school are known to the YOS, and the school setting has proved to be a good location for YOS staff to meet young people. This collaboration has included joint approaches to identifying and planning constructive activities  for young  people  on  the SILS roll to undertake;  such as  a weekend  Residential  "Boot Camp"  which was greatly  enjoyed by participants and a forthcoming Boxing programme to be run in summer term 2019 using the In Your Corner Boxing  resource; an organisation  that  has  already  established very strong links to the YOS.
Finally, a very exciting new development is an intended partnership with health colleagues to divert more young people from the criminal justice system. Senior police staff are supporting this project which aims to deliver a health based "prevention plus" intervention to young people who would otherwise receive an OOCD; this new intervention will also include the health theoretical approach to reducing serious youth violence.
The YOS has not yet been able to develop an intervention to address adolescent to parent violence; however research has been  undertaken  to  identify  what  possible interventions are available; it is probable that this will involve some YOS staff being trained to deliver an intervention, rather than collaborating with a third sector provider. It is expected that this intervention will be first delivered in summer 2019.
Reducing the number of young people receiving a custodial sentence
This has been a key goal for the YOS during the year and overall performance has been excellent, with very low numbers of young people receiving custodial sentences. Over the year, only 9 young people received a custodial sentence, a substantial achievement. This achievement is made the more noteworthy in that during the year sentencers were strongly instructed to deal more punitively with repeat knife possession defendants, however only two young people received a custodial sentence for offences of knife possession. The most frequent offence that attracted custody was robbery (3 occasions), with one young  person sent to custody for either committing offences of burglary, conspiracy to commit GBH, Possessing a firearm and possession with intent to supply class A drugs. The most common theme emerging is young person involvement either in the local drug supplying market or undertaking county lines; this was the background to 7 of these crimes. Thus, the aim in 2019 for the YOS is to collaborate with other agencies to address the criminal exploitation agenda so that young people are not brought into this very dangerous criminal arena.
Another issue of concern is the age of young people when sent to custody, of those so sentenced 4 (44 %) were 16 or younger at point of sentence. Equally concerning is the rapid escalation of a significant proportion of these young people to custody; again 4 of the 9 had no or very little contact with the YOS in the community before they were incarcerated.
In 2016/17, it was considered likely that some young people would receive custodial sentences due to non compliance with YOS orders. As a result, the YOS has been keen to improve compliance; by ensuring that orders are quickly started and that interventions are delivered punctually; key issues identified as pivotal to obtaining compliance with young people. In a similar vein, where compliance is not forthcoming, early return of the order to court is critical to ascertain whether alternative community interventions could be effective to deliver compliance. This level of attention to ensuring rapid engagement with Court orders has been instigated through joint discussions with sentencers at the local Youth Court. This strategy has largely been effective as no young person received custody during 2018/19 for non-compliance with their Community Order.
Reducing the reoffending rate of those subject to supervision from Southwark YOS.
Performance with relation to this criterion has been improving during 2017/18; decreasing but still high numbers of young people re-offended but when they did so, they committed relatively few re-offences and these were usually for less serious crimes than their index offence. Analysis undertaken  in Spring 2018  found  that  young  people  who re-offended tended to have index  offences  of either  possession of cannabis  or possession of a knife.  As a result, the YOS has been liaising with the local substance misuse providers, CGL to develop a new substance misuse intervention that will be effective in preventing reoffending by young people for whom cannabis misuse is becoming problematic.  Further analysis needs to occur concerning the effectiveness of the YOS' Trauma Informed Weapons Awareness programme to ensure its contents remain relevant to the needs of young people who undertake this intervention. Re-offending rates have been a consistent theme in YOS management meetings; this is a key issue for further action in 2019/20.  As the YOS concentrated on managing the high levels of risk of harm during 2018, addressing re- offending rates inevitably took a lower priority, particularly as performance was already on an improving trajectory. In 2019/2020, it will be a YOS priority to use the YJB'S reoffending tool kit more thoroughly, and to ensure existing interventions are reviewed and new interventions piloted.
Many of the activities outlined in the earlier sections on "Engaging with young people and their families" and "Reducing serious violence" also fully contribute to reducing re-offending rates and should be viewed as such.
	Southwark Youth Justice Plan 2019-20	2

	Southwark Youth Justice Plan 2019-20	2



	Southwark Youth Justice Plan 2019-20	2

	Southwark Youth Justice Plan 2019-20	2



