Youth Justice Strategic Plan Southend Youth Offending Service 2019-2020
Carol Compton
Head of Youth Offending Service
June 2019
CONTENTS
Sections
1 . Role and Purpose
2. Structure and Governance
3. Partnership Arrangements
4. Priorities
5 Volunteer Development
6. Service Delivery Plan
7. Resources
Risk Management


The principal aim of the youth justice system is to prevent offending by children and young people (Crime and Disorder Act 1998) and Southend YOS works in partnership to:
• Reduce number of children into the youth justice system
• Reduce reoffending by children in the youth justice system
• Improve safety and wellbeing of children in the youth justice system
• Improve outcomes for chiEdren in the youth justice system
Southend Youth Offending Service is required to deliver interventions that safeguard the public, minimise harm to young people, and reduce the likelihood of further offending, in a demonstrable and accountable manner but the demands on the youth justice system have changed significantly compared to ten years ago. There are far fewer children in the system, including those entering for the first time and those in custody. This is a great success; however new challenges have emerged. As the cohort gets smaller it becomes more concentrated with children who have the most complex needs (including health and education needs) and challenging behaviours. Consequently, having a more complex cohort means that the expectations on youth justice practitioners is greater than ever.
In 2016, Charlie Taylor, who has since become YJB Chair, carried out a review of the youth justice system. Lord Laming completed a review on protecting children in care from involvement with the crimina justice system. Both of these included recommendations for extensive changes to youth justice in England and Wales and the wider criminal justice system.
The purpose of this document is to establish a Strategic Plan that governs local delivery of those programmes in place in the operational area covered by Southend Youth Offending Service (YOS).
The document will outline the expectations placed upon Southend YOS* effective partnership arrangements with both the statutory and voluntary sector, and how these arrangements generate effective outcomes for children and young people who offend or are at risk of offending.
The success of this document as a Youth Justice Strategic Plan will be evidenced by a reduction in reoffending and the incidence and prevalence of youth crime, and youth anti-social behaviour.
This Plan will demonstrate the interface with the Early Help Family Support Service and how Southend Youth Offending Service is fully engaged with:
		Local policing practice and anti-social behaviour
• Southend-on-Sea Corporate Plan
• Children & Young People's Plan
• Voluntary sector

Southend Youth Offending Service is a partnership which includes, but also extends beyond, the direct delivery of youth justice services. tn order to deliver youth justice outcomes, it must be able to function effectively in both of the two key sectors within which it operates - criminal justice services and services for children and young people. The YOS is located within the People Directorate which incorporates both children's and eduit services.
The CSP sits as the YOS Management Board and has links with both the Health & Wellbeing Board and the LSCB.
The YOS Management Board meets five times a year and is chaired on an alternate basis by the Chief Executive of Southend Borough Council and Essex Police Chief Superintendent. There is high level partnership representation on the Board from all partner agencies, Essex Fire Servicer executive members of the borough council and the voluntary sector. The HOS is a member of the Community Safety Priority Leadership Board, and Success for All Children's Group thus ensuring effective strategic relationships are maintained that both complement the work of the YOS and ensure delivery of universal and specialist services to young people in the youth justice system. As Violence & Vulnerability has been identified as a significant national concern it has been agreed in Southend that it requires specific attention from the Borough's 4 key strategic partnerships board, CSP, Safeguarding Adults Board, LSCB and Health and Wellbeing Board. Consequently a new cross cutting strategic group has been formulated to focus attention and resources on the issues of which the YOS is a part.
Likewise YOS performance and priorities contribute to the priorities and strategic actions of the borough's Children & Young People Plan. 'Continue to reduce crime, disorder and anti-social behaviour' and 'Continue to improve outcomes for vulnerable children' remain amongst the borough's corporate priorities thus ensuring the YOS works closely with all other relevant partner agencies and that there is a clear understanding across the partnership of issues and needs of young people at risk of, or involved with, the youth justice system.
Southend YOS attends all pianning boards within the secure estate to ensure information is shared at every stage to enable the effective delivery of services to young people in custody and the YOS has a protocol with the Secure Estate.
The need to improve outcomes for our most vulnerable and hard to reach children, young people and their families remains a high priority for the council and the Children's Partnership. Within the context of tighter council budgets, we are all now moving more swiftly to target resources to those most in need.
Our shared vision for all Southend children and young people is to help them raise their aspiration and achievement, ensure they have the opportunities they need for inclusion, facilitate their participation in decision making that affects their lives and strive for excellence in the services we provide for them.

A 'core} integrated Early Help Family Support & YOS service has been operational since 1 April 2016. It incorporates the following teams and services:
• Youth Offending Service
• Edge of Care Team
• Targeted Youth Support team/Young Carers
• Troubled Families
• Early Help Family Support
• Young Persons Drug & Alcohol Team
• Teenage Pregnancy
• Community Engagement
• All Children reported to the Police and registered as Missing
 Adolescent Intervention & Prevention Team
The Youth Offending Service continues to fulfil its statutory duty under the Crime & Disorder Act to prevent offending and re-offending across the borough of Southend and the YOS Head of Service manages all teams under EHFS.
Continued recognition of the critical importance of prevention and the success of the Street Engagement Challenge & Support, and Family intervention programmes operated over the last few years by Southend YOS, has resulted in the local authority continuing to fund these operations since government funding ceased.
The Troubled Families agenda is managed by the Head of YOS and has enabled us to broaden out the existing family support infrastructure available in the borough of Southend. Troubled Families work alongside Youth Offending to provide an intensive family approach not only to reduce and prevent offending, but also to address the generational problems that the family face, for example benefit-reliant parents who may be suffering from depression or anxiety. By working together we can address the problems of the whole family calling on expertise from DWPI EWMHS and other specialist services. This whole family approach allows us to support the young person by empowering parents and giving confidence to provide a positive role model. At the same time, the young person will be supported to address their offending behaviour and see the benefits of leading a better quality life. Phase 2 (20152020) of the Troubled Families Programme introduced broader criteria set by the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) enabling the Early Help Famiiy Support team to build on the success of Phase 1 , The new criteria extended support for "children who need help"i domestic abuse and health; these additional criteria have supported work at an earlier stage of intervention with young people and their families preventing an escalation of behaviours which may result in antisocial behaviour and offending. To date the families turned around in Phase 2 (605 to March 2019) met the above criteria and the work undertaken to meet all positive outcomes also contributes to the prevention of young people entering the criminaE justice route. 368 Young people have received, or are currently receiving, an intervention which specifically reduces the risk of offending or anti-social behaviour in Phase 2,
Attendance is another key issue for YOS and Troubled Families. Consequently, TF Practitioners with Police, Schools and Attendance team instigated a system for addressing truancy. This Partnership initiative provides early intervention to encourage the child back into school.
We believe that integrated working makes a real difference to the lives of parents and their families. We recognise that the challenges presented by troubled families can be better tackled through integrated and focussed working between partners and a more joined up use of resources.
Attendance is another key issue for YOS and Troubled Families. Consequently, TF Practitioners with Police, Schools and Attendance team instigated a system for addressing truancy. This Partnership initiative provides early intervention to encourage the child back into school.
By further embedding a strong, integrated, single point of contact for Early Help which is co-located with the MASH +1 the service has enabled all Southend's contributors to Early Help to: act before the needs of children and families escalate; focus on achieving priority outcomes for those children: young people and families who need it the most; give every child the opportunity to reach their full potential; and to have flexible services that provide the right support, at the right time and at the right level.
Alongside Phase 2 of the Troubled Families agenda, this provides us with the opportunity to have a multi* agency, multi-response to not only those families whose children are at risk of or involved in crime and anti-social behaviour but to those challenging families where the adults behaviour is affecting the community in which they live and the children to whom they are meant to be positive role models. It enables us to ensure that no child or family fails through the net'l and work with those most difficult and out of reach families that we have living and causing fear on our estates.
Our overarching aim is to close the divide between families that have access to opportunities and those that do not by creating role models* strengthening families, targeting services and focusing delivery in the community.
Essex Poiice Fire and Crime Commissioner continue to oversee the Reducing Reoffending Board, o which Southend YOS is a part. The partnership recognise that a whole family approach is more likely secure positive outcomes and a reduction in re-offending than working with adults, children and in isolation. We sit on the Strategic MAPPA Board and engage at a county level with the Multi-Agenc) Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA). Essex has established a Violence Reduction Unit of whict Southend is a part strategically. To ensure that Southend protects the borough from violence anc criminal behaviour, it has combined the efforts of the 4 strategic partnership boards; (Local Safeguarding Children's Board/ Safeguarding Adults Board/Health and Well-Being Board/Community Safeo
Partnership) by establishing a cross cutting 'violence and vulnerability strategic group' that draws on the 4 Boards expertise, knowledge and spheres of influence to create an Action Plan that reflects ou determination to keep Southend-on-Sea safe and thriving (appendix 1). The Plan's activities are organised under the 4 Ps:
• Prepare (ensuring that all the partnership agencies are fully briefed, staff are appropriately trained, policies are in place and communities are engaged)  Prevention (education and public awareness)
• Protection (safeguarding vulnerable children and adults)
• Pursue (disrupting criminal behaviour including the use of civil and criminal justice interventions, create a civil enforcement presence on the street)
Although Southend is a Unitary Authority, we recognise that it lives within the wider Essex family and will continue to work in partnership with our neighbours in Thurrock and Essex County and collaboratE with county-wide partnerships and agencies to create a safer Essex.

Key Objectives and Targets for 2019-20
The MOJ have three indicators pertaining to Youth Justice:-
• Reduce re-offending (frequency and rate of re-offending)
• Reduce the use of custody
• Reduce first time entrants to the youth justice system
In addition, Southend YOS Management Board have continued to measure:
• Engagement by young people who offend in suitable education, training and emptoyment, at the end of their Order
• Number of young people going through Triage and re-offending
Southend Youth Offending Service also aims to:
• Ensure children and young people are protected from harm
• Minimise the risk of harm posed by children and young people
 Improve victim satisfaction and public confidence
Summary of Performance against MOJ and local indicators 2017/18
Rate of proven re-offending bv younq people in the Youth Justice System
The MOJ provide data on proven reoffending rates using the Police National Computer (PNC) data. The latest MOJ data available is for the April 2016 to March 2017 cohort. They report reoffending performance based on two measures; Frequency and Binary.
The % of young people reoffending after 12 months, referring to the above mentioned period, was 38 which is an increase of 1.9% compared to the April 2015 to March 2016 cohort rate of 36.1%. The MOJ pub*ish figures every quarter.
The above percentage binary figures are calculated on the number in the Cohort compared to the number of young people reoffending.
April 2015 to March 2016 the number in the Cohort was 108 with 39 young people re-offending.
April 2016 to March 2017 the number in the Cohort was 92 with 35 young people re-offending
The Frequency Rate (the average number of re-offences per young person in the cohort after 12 months) for the April 2016 to March 2017 cohort was 4.1 (calculated from a total of 142 reoffences) compared to the April 2015 to March 2016 cohort was 40 (calculated from a total of 156 re-offences)
In order to monitor re-offending within current time, local performance monitoring for re-offending is undertaken on a monthly basis. This year we took a cohort of young people who received substantive outcomes in the January 2018 to March 2018 period and monitored them for reoffending throughout the year.
Local performance for 2018/19 shows that Southend achieved a 36.0% re-offending rate which is lower than the expected local performance target of 40%.
The ercenta e of oun eo le receivin a conviction in court who are sentenced to custod
Figures for 2018/19 show 2 custodial episodes for young people in the Borough. Taken as a rate per 1000 10-17 year olds in the Borough results in a figure of 0.13 for 2018/19 and well below the target of
1 .28
First time entrants to the youth iustice system
The year 2018/19 ended with only 32 young people entering the system. We have continued to reduce FTE's since the original baseline was set in 2005/6 from 358 young people to 32 in 2018/19 evidencing an 91% reduction
The percentage of vounq people in suitable education, training. employment at the end of Order
At the end of year 2018/19 81.0% of young people were in suitable ETE at close of Order. This met our local target of 80%, an improvement on last year's performance where we narrowly missed the local target achieving 782%. Extensive work continues to be carried out by our Education Officer in engaging hard to reach young people, and closer working with other services within Early Help, Family Support and Youth Offending Services continues.
Triaqe
Since Triage being implemented within the Borough in April 20091 1572 young people have been through the process. Out of the 1572 young people who have received Triage since its inception only 233 have re-offended which represents a 14.8% cumulative re-offending rate over a 10 year period, down from 15.3% last year.

The focus for volunteering has concentrated on consolidating the volunteering process and supporting volunteers.
Currently there are 38 volunteers across the service with 65% volunteering within community settings The ethnicity of our volunteering group is 65.8% White British with 68% female and 31% male. 17 0 these are Referral Panel members, 5 were recruited to the service in December.
Ail volunteers undertake the volunteer training with a manager and experienced staff before being place( with a programme/project. An induction and compulsory online safeguarding training is then completed additionally we have been able to offer CSE on line training, First Aid and Food Hygiene Training. Al volunteers receive regular supervision which looks at the development of their volunteering and future opportunities, one volunteer this year has been successful in gaining employment with the service as Positive Activities Worker.
Volunteers are a vital part of our service, and deliver invaluable support to many of the community/family children and young people programmes we deliver across the borough of Southend.
We strive to provide opportunities for volunteers to increase their know}edge of services and issues tha impact on young people, as we feel this is an important element to ensuring that volunteers have the necessary skills, knowledge & support.

Service Delivery Areas
Services are focused on providing evidence based interventions which are designed to meet the individual offending related needs of each young person as identified through Asset and Whole Family Assessment The functions of Southend YOS are as follows:
Interventions
• Group work programmes
• Appropriate adult services
• Delivery of EET provision
• Substance misuse work
 Mentoring
 Parenting work
 Restorative Justice
• Reparation
Prevention, Pre-court and Restorative Justice
• Assessments and reports for court
• Triage
		Work with young people at risk of offending
		Work with parents whose children are at risk of offending and re-offending
• Work with young people made subject to Acceptable behaviour Contracts
• Work with young people under age of 18 who are stopped by the police
• Street deployments targeting young people who are behaving anti-socially
		Work with police to deliver youth cautions and youth conditional cautions
• Restorative justice
• Work with victims
Post Court
• Service to courts
		Supervise young people on community sentences and post custody supervision
• Bail support and supervision
• Accommodation
		Clinical Nurse Specialist (mental health)
		Drug & alcohol worker
• Offender management of young people at high risk of re-offending  Integrated resettlement support for those leaving custody
• Intensive supervision & surveillance  Referral Order co-ordination
Service Deliver Plan - Ob'ectives
1. To prevent children and young people from entering the criminal justice system
Southend Youth Offending Service believes that youth crime early intervention and preventative work with children, young people and families provides considerable opportunities for joint working at strategic and operational levels. Further it demonstrates that when early intervention is embedded it can relieve the pressure on services so a given level of resource is used to better effect.
Therefore preventative opportunities must exist at various stages in a young person's life and the YOS must prioritise partnership efforts effectively whilst adopting a risk-led approach to intervention planning across all its early intervention and prevention programmes.
Early intervention and prevention is not a single, one off event but a process whereby:
• Children, young people and families difficulties are identified before they have reached a point at which the children's development and wellbeing is seriously compromised
• Having been identified early on, the scale and nature of these problems are properly understood and a plan for offering help is developed through a process of high quality assessment* and  Children, young people and families are offered the support and challenge they need in line with the assessments, for as long as it is needed
Our aims therefore are to
• significantty reduce first time entrants into the criminal justice system
• reduce youth anti-social behaviour
• reduce the risks that lead children and young people to commit asb and crime
• avoid criminalising children and young people, which in turn significantly increases their opportunities for more positive outcomes
• Make the best use of partnerships in a time of financial constraint to ensure gains made can be sustained and built upon
2018119 Achievements
	Over the last year the team has achieved some amazing results, maintaining its low number of young people in the borough entering the criminal justice system. Only 32 young people entered the criminal justice system for the first time. Last year saw the use of pre-court disposals decrease to 108 in 2018/19 from 133 in 2017/18. This reduction was achieved by offering the police and young people viable alternatives, which include Triage, YC is & YCC's, rather than prosecution to court Any child receiving a Youth Caution in the borough is automaticaily offered voluntary support and intervention to prevent re-offending in the community.
		During the last financial year our Street Engagement Officers undertook 385 street
based deployments engaging with 3,997 children and young people in the community *Engaging with young people in their own communities has led to a number of outcomes including:
Better relationships with children and young people
Ability to divert young people into positive activities
Understand first-hand the contextual risks within our communities
Increased gang and county line intelligence
Increased visibility of uniformed staff within key locations of the borough
• Operation Red bull was undertaken on 9 occasions over the last year in conjunction with Essex Police, these were joint operations on key nights of the year running till midnight (GCSE results, Halloween, end of term) to engage with children and young people and ensure that they were safe whilst in the community. This resulted in over 20 litres of alcohol being confiscated, cannabis grinders and knuckle dusters also being removed from children in the community
• We have daily contact with the Police, attending daily briefings, conducting joint patrols, truancy visits and home visits. Attendance at Local Community Meetings enables us to glean first-hand information quickly from the community and allows us to respond accordingly. The YOS are part of the town link scheme where we are in contact with local security and CCTV enabling us to respond quickly to any reported instances of ASB. Our partnership working with Police, Town Link, BID, SMAART, CSP among others has led to a joint effort in addressing anti-social behaviour
• After the Problem Profile was completed last year it was noted that school attendance was a major factor in young people becoming involved in offending, high truancy levels were also linked to a number of other concerns such as child sexual exploitation low attainment and placed families at risk of being on the edge of care proceedings. We continue to deliver patrols every week, helping schools and the local authority achieve local and nationai school attendance targets. This has led to 424 young people receiving truancy visits. This is a joint initiative completed alongside local senior schoots and Essex Police and has led to families in need of support being identified at an early stage and being referred through the Front Door to receive support via our Early Help Offer.
• The YOS Prevention Team is now embedded as part of the Early Help Offer and provides suppor to young people who come through the Front Door assessed as being at risk of offending committing anti-social behaviour, at risk of child sexual exploitation or online grooming. The referrals are received from a range of agencies including schools, poticet social care, self-referral! and via internal de-escalation meetings and all cases are worked to the Southend Outcome Plai according to the Troubled Families principles.
2. To reduce re-offending by children and young people under the age of 18
According to YJB datat in 2007 Southend had a cohort of 562 offenders with 181 re-offending. This equates to a 32.2% re-offending rate, in the East 12 years Southend YOS has consistently reduced the cohort size, so much so that the latest figures published by the YJB in April 2019 (for the April 2016 to March 2017 cohort) indicates a cohort of 92 offenders with 35 re-offenders - a re-offending rate of 38% This is a increase of 1.9% (36.1%) compared to April 2015 to March 2016.
Whilst historical data indicates that Southend has a high reoffending rate, there is a story of place behind this data which is important to demonstrate in order to reflect the actual re-offending characteristics and performance. It is also important to note that while our reoffending rate is still higher than we would like, it has stabilised recent years, having previously peaked at 51.6%.
Much of our work has been displaced following the implementation of our prevention and diversiot schemes. The inception of Triage in 2009 has not only had a significant impact on preventing people entering the criminal justice system but has also been extremely successful in preventing re offending.
Unfortunately, Triage re-offending data is not included in the YJB performance measures but the Triage re-offending rate is now 14.9% over 10 years (cumulative). If Triage was includedl our April 2016 March 2017 cohort would have increased by a further 106 offenders to 198 with the percentage for all re offending reducing from 38% to 25.8%.
The reality remains however that out of just under 16,000 10-17 year olds in the borough, only 92 werf subject to substantive outcomes during the last published period of which only 35 were re-offenders compared to 108 of which 39 were re-offenders last year.
It is a nationally recognised statistic that 20% of prolific/revolving door offenders are responsible for 80% of crime committed. However for Southend during 2018/19 10 most prolific offenders were responsible foj 68 offences which accounted for 25% of all youth crime compared to 10 young people who were responsible for 69 offences and 22.4% of all youth crime committed in the borough in the previous year. This demonstrates therefore that our ways of working with these prolific offenders (those committing 5 or more offences within 12 months), by providing additional support and intervention over and above that prescribed by National Standards is achieving results and this has undoubtedly been achieved through strong and effective partnership working.
Southend YOS has undertaken its tenth Problem Profile for the time period April 18 to March 19 to inform this Plan. Previously this document has focused heavily on offences - those most common, when and where they are committed, and by what age and ethnicity of offender. Over the two years the YOS has overcome challenges brought about by unavoidable changes to policing structure, resulting in us obtaining less data on a regular basis than we have before.
April 2015 also saw the YOS change case management systems to a single joined-up system shared with education departments within the council and more recently to Asset Plus. We have therefore taken the opportunity to shift focus from offence-based analysis, to offender-based analysis; engagement in education, where they live, what particular features the groups have that indicate where resources might be most effectively targeted. Whilst it is useful for the police to be able to target their efforts at the locatior of offencesF the provision of Family and Community based help by the Early Help Family Support and Youth Offending Services needs to focus on offender location and their families. The incorporation of Early Help into our overall Service area has further allowed us to enhance our innovative approach to the way we deliver services around the needs of hard to reach and vulnerable children, young people and their families.
Court outcomes and interventions starting in 2018/19 were given for a total of 272 offences, committed b) 138 individual unique young people. As stated above some of these young people received multiple outcomes.
These offences were dealt with in the foftowing ways:
105 of these offences were committed by 84 young people resulting in a diversion into Triage.
131 offences were committed by 52 young people resulting in a statutory outcome which includes Referral Order (RO), Youth Rehabilitation Orders (YRO's), Detention Training Orders (DTO')s, Youth Cautions and Youth Conditional Cautions.
A further 36 offences were committed by 22 young people resulting in court outcomes with no statutory intervention. These include Conditional discharges, Absolute discharges and/or Fines.
2018/19 Achievements
The latest YJB reoffending rate demonstrates that Southend has dropped to 38.0%. This is below the Eastern average Performance of 39 6% and significantly beEow the National average of 40.6%.
• Southend YOS continues to use the YJB Re-Offending Toolkit as a live monitoring and performance measure to ensure analysis informs practice. Performance for year ending 18/19 was 36% re-offending rate, The YJB published data (as in the bullet point above) is 18 months behind 'real timet We therefore anticipate that between now and the next published data our reoffending rate will continue to be at least in line with SE and National average if not considerably better.
		Introduction of YRO reviews being conducted by panel members
 Introduction of Out of Court Disposal Panel replacing Triage system and diverting Community Resolutions into YOS interventions
 Identifying early emerging patterns and trends of anti-social and low level offending behaviour being referred through the front door to prevent future escalation.
• Refreshed exit strategy procedures to prevent revolving door offenders and create sustainable pathways to offence free lifestyles,
• Commissioning of East 15 (theatre/drama 3rd year university students) to work with identified themes associated with offending and to deliver tailored interventions that reach out to our kinaesthetic learners to prevent repeat behaviours and offending
To minimise the use of remand and custody for children and young people
Southend YOS is committed to ensuring that the use of remands and custody is a last resort for young people. Consequently we provide good quality and realistic bail support packages and reports to the courts using experienced staff in order to maintain the courts confidence in both bail provision and community sentences.
Use of secure remand as a percentage of all court ordered remands and bail

Use of Custod
Year2014/15015/16016/17017/18018/19use of custody% of young people who receive custody as a proportion of all sentences imposed by the courtPer 1,000 head of population
0.69
1 1 young people er 1,000 ead of population
.44
 young eopleer I , 000 ead of opufation
.69
1 1 young eopleead of opulation
.32
 young eopieead of opulation
.13
young eople2018/19 Achievements
• Many of the young people in Southend who come to the attention of the Youth Offending Service have entrenched patterns of behaviour and often receive multiple court outcomes in the year. The YOS maintains the confidence of sentencers by offing alternative sentencing proposals to custody by identifying robust, relevant and timely interventions that are appropriate and in a manner that doesn't place the public at risk of harm. There were 2 custody episodes for young people in the Borough out of 82 court outcomes during 2018/19. Using the YJB measure of per 100,000 of the 10-17 year old population in the Borough, results in a performance figure of 0.13, significantly lower than the performance throughout 17/18 of 0.32.
 Southend YOS will continue to ensure the following are in place - Bail support packages that incorporate a range of specifically tailored interventions (including sport, outdoor pursuit* ETE, social skills), prohibitive measures, including electronically monitored curfews and restrictions on associations and exclusion zones and the use of Troubled Families where appropriate,
 Continue to utilise an early warning notification system of young people at risk of remand to ensure we present robust bail support packages to the court at the earliest opportunity.
o To minimise the risk of harm posed by children and young people
The Youth Offending Service has a duty to co-operate with the Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) and is committed to its role in supporting local information sharing and management of risk to the public posed by young people. Registered sex offenders and those young people who pose a risk of harm to the public are referred to MAPPA ensuring safe and effective management either in the community or following release from custody. During 2018/19 Southend YOS did not have any Serious Case Reviews.
2018/19 Achievements
• Undertaken multi agency Case Management Forums for all young people assessed as presenting a risk of harm to others
• Continued to embed strong partnerships across agencies including MASH +
• Utilising greater control measures across all order types which included the introduction of
Community Protection Notices, for those over the age of 16 as a deterrent/precursor to issuing a Criminal Behaviour Order
• Working with partners, which include the police education, MASH+, PREVENT, Channel Panel, Probation services, housing and children and adults social care to ensure appropriate information sharing regarding violence and vulnerability to address and minimise issues in relation to serious youth violence
• Identifying potential repeat victims by ensuring the young offenders plan includes relevant conditions of non-association and exclusions zones.
o Ensure children and young people are protected from harm and are helped tc achieve more
Southend Youth Offending Service has a statutory duty under section 1 1 of the Children Act 2004 to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child. We are represented on the Local Safeguarding Children's Board and produce a yearly section 1 1 repott to the Board.
Multi agency meetings are held within the YOS (Case management forums) in order to manage Safety and Wellbeing and risk of harm for all those assessed as being high or very high within these areas.
We are fully integrated with children's specialist services and look forward to opportunities to integrate further with adult services as we embed as one department Whilst the YOS has a seconded health worker, being part of the Early Help Family Support & Youth Offending Service ensures that there are many specialist workers who can specifically contribute to work with young people who have a range of complex needs.
2018/19 Achievements
• Attended joint YOS/Social Care meetings to ensure effective joint management and working arrangements
• Part of strategic & operational arrangements for young people involved in or at risk of exploitation
o To improve victim satisfaction and public confidence
Maintaining the confidence of sentencers, the public and victims of crime is crucial and critical to our role in both preventing and reducing offending and we are engaged with the work of the Local Criminal Justice Board.
Ali known victims are offered the opportunity to participate in one or more of the following ways:
• Attendance at a Referral Order Panel meeting
• Attendance at a Restorative Justice Conference
• Producing a victim impact statement which can be used in victim awareness work with young offender and/or presented by YOS victim worker at panel/conference
• Shuttle mediation
		Receiving a letter of apology
We continue to achieve high levels of victim engagement. Southend YOS makes a significant contribution to building confidence through our partnership work and our street engagement deployments and attendance at police Local Action Groups demonstrate reductions in reports of anti-social behaviour to the police
2018/19 Achievements
 A full range of restorative outcomes offered to both victims and young people
• 416 hours of indirect reparation has been undertaken, throughout a variety of community settings including young offenders preparing garden furniture and artefacts for the Royal Hampton Cour Flower Show, painting a communal play area at a local school, dog walking for an animal rescuf centre, assisting in running youth groups in the local community and offering assistance to loca homeless charities. Although the majority of our reparation is indirect we continue, where possible
to tailor the interventions to the needs of victims combined with the interests and learning styles o the young people. Reparation has also been utilised to evidence local work in the community or CVTs to help assist young people in gaining employment or volunteering opportunities anc encouraged our young people to pursue constructive use of leisure time, diverting them away frorr asb and repeat offending.
• Increased number of direct and indirect RJ*s, better links with victim unit at Essex Police victim engagement is quicker
Our Focus for 2019/20
Interventions
• Continue to improve our quality assurance and development programmes across the service ensure the YOS is meeting the needs of young people and continuing to meet its aims of reducinc offending and re-offending.
• Continue to use the YJB live tracking tool to robustly monitor quarterly cohorts and takf immediate action to address any identified risks that may increase the likelihood of reoffending
 Provide substantive interventions for atl 16 to 18 year olds who are not in education, employment or training (NEET). All intervention plans will include ETE targets for all YP that are NEET or at risk of becoming NEET
• Ensure all assessments inciude the impact of exclusion, persistent absence, LAC and SEN as being key indicators of being at risk of entering and remaining within the Youth Justice System. Southend YOS & Early Help Family Support Service will ensure early identification of these indicators, recognise the risk factors through appropriate assessments and prioritise the interventions to support the needs and address the risks.
	Continue to increase the upward intake of RJ for ali orders. Case managers will ensure that reparation activities are indicative of the wishes of the victim
 Explore the intrinsic links between missing and child exploitation for those subject to YOS through assessment and robust plans will be put in place to minimise risks and safeguard the young person.
	Joint interventions undertaken with colleagues across Early Help Family Support & YOS to improve outcomes for young people
• Take an active part in delivery of the the Service Maturity Model Action Plan.
		Implement new National Standards and Case Management Guidance
Prevention, Pre-court and Restorative Justice
• To continue to promote the Out of Court Disposai to sustain the current low numbers of young people becoming First Time Entrants to the Youth Justice System
 Prevention work to continue to focus on preventing anti-social behaviour within the borougl through street engagement patrols, joint police operations and the use of Anti-Social Behaviou Powers such as Acceptable Behaviour Contracts, Injunctions and Criminal Behaviour Orders.
• Exclusion, persistent absence, CLA and SEN continue to be identified as key indicators of bein at risk of entering and remaining within the YJS. Southend YOS will ensure early identification c these indicatorsr recognise the risk factors through appropriate assessments and prioritise th interventions to support the needs and address the risks.
• Continued implementation of the Take 3 Parenting Programme across Early Help Famil) Support/Youth Offending Service
Post Court
 Continue to reduce the use of remands to custody and maintain systems and practice to avoi( unnecessary and inappropriate remands
• Continue to maintain c}ose working relationships with the Courts in order to sustain high levels o confidence in YOS community based interventions
• To maintain the current performance in line with England and Wales average re-offending rate
• To increase Restorative Justice Interventions for community orders and increase levels of direc victim participation

The remand budget totals El 10,562 this year
Partner contributions to the youth offending partnership pooled budget 2019/20
AgencyStaffing costs (E)Payments in kind - revenue (Z)Other delegated funds (E)Total (E)Local authority*€333,177€381 ,498€714,675Police Service242,214E90,669E1321883National Probation ServiceE37,500€5,000E42,500Health Service€41,019€41,019Police and crime commissioner* *E18,586E18,586YJB Good Practice Grant€213,477213,477Other* **€92,000€92,000Total€453,910€801 ,230The YJB Grant will be used exclusively for the purposes of the operation of the youth justice system and the provision of youth justice services with a view to achieving the following outcomes:
		• Reduction in youth re-offending;
		• Reduction in the numbers of first time entrants to the justice system;
		* Reduction in the use of youth custody
		• Effective public protection, and
		• Effective safeguarding
EXPENDITURE CATEGORYReduction in youth re-offendingEl 10,000Reduction in the numbers of first time entrants to the justice systemE60toooReduction in the use of youth custodyE40,oooEffective public protection, and€5,000Effective safeguardingE5,OOOSouthend YOS continues to experience a state of instability regarding seconded staff. The National Probation Service, have been unable to provide us with a Seconded Probation Officer resource for the past 2 years. This has now been escalated to phase 3 of the National Protocol
Essex Police made a strategic decision to remove the warranted seconded police officers from the Youth Offending Services across Southend, Essex and Thurrock in 2016 and replace them with civilian administrators known as Children and Young Persons (CYP) co-ordinators. These are now based at Police HQ and not in the YOS. YOS has access to local CYP Police officers accessible via the CPU.
Staffing
Head of Service
1 *FTEEarly Help and Family Support ServicesService ManagerPerformance Management
1 x FTETeam Manager
1 FTEHealth and Diversion Worker
1 x FTEYOT Practitioners
7 x FT$ 3 x PT & 1 x vacancyReferral Pane' Coordinator
1 *FTEVictim Worker
1 *FTEEducation Worker
1 x FTE
Probation
1 Vacancy
YOS Police
1 x vacancyStaff Gender and Ethnicity
GenderMale6Female11Total17EthnicityWhite15Mixed/Multi le ethnic grou s1Asian]Asian BritishBlack1OtherPrefer not to sayTotal17Referral Panel Gender and Ethnici
GenderMale59Total14EthnicitWhite British13Mixed/Multi le Ethnic Grou sAsian/Asian BritishBlack / African / Caribbean / Black BritishOther Ethnic Grou3Prefer not to answer0Total14


Risk management is an active process within Southend YOS, one which is incorporated into our performance management framework
SERVICE
OBJECTIVERISK DESCRIPTIONCONTROLSOWNERMaintain the sustained reduction in first time entrants to the youth justice systemAny reduction in service provision could reduce the numbers of young people being diverted away from the CJS and cause an increase in FTE.Ensure resources are effectively targeted to minimise any potential impactHead of YOSReduce re-offending (frequency and rate of re-offending)In the context of further reductions in YJBT LA and partner funding, future funding of the YOS continues to present possibly the biggest risk to future delivery as does any continuing instability regarding seconded staff.
Reductions in FTEs could potentially result in higher reoffending rates as young people are entering the system at a more serious level and therefore more likely to reoffendEnsure that the necessary recommendations for funding the YOS are included in the budgetary processes of each of the statutory partners" Think creatively about how to maximise the use of resources in a time of financial constraint and to make the best use of partnerships with other organisations so that the gains made can be sustained and built upon
Monitor outcomes data and ensure targeting and quality of work to reduce re-offending is robust andHead of YOS
Service
Manager,
YOS Manager
Senior Prac'sReduce the use of custody and minimise the use of remandIncrease in number of remands could result in an increased cost for the Local Authority
Whilst we have continued to reduce this target, it remains a challenge for 2019/20Close monitoring with early warning triggers Enhanced provision of alternatives to remand
Early warning notification system to identify potential custody cases, robust alternatives presented to the courtHead of YOS,
Service
Manager
Team
Manager
Ensure children and young people are protected from harmPoor economic climate impacts on education and employment opportunities for young people
Young offenders are more likely to be at risk of child exploitationMaximise provision for all young offenders out of EET. Connexions
Personal Advisers to work with case workers to help advise and guide young people and offer on*going support and guidance to broker admission to courses or training schemes
Continue working with children who go missing from home
Training and development of staff to ensure they can identify where exploitation is an issueTeam
ManagerMinimise the risk of harm posed by children and young peopleRise in gang related behaviourContinue to work proactively with police colleagues to both prevent gang behaviour in the first instance and target any known behaviour effectivelyService
ManagerImprove victim satisfaction and public confidenceA serious incident receives significant negative media coverageMonitor risk and vulnerability management processes to ensure delivery is maintained at a high standard
Ensure any lessons from serious incidents continue to be integrated into racticeAll ManagersE-signature or signature:
Print Name•  Date: .
Chair of Management Board and Chief Executive of Southend Borough Council
E-signature or signature:

Print Name•. ......CAROL COMPTON.............. . . .Date- .
YOT Head of Service
2

2



