				


STOCKPORT
YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN
2019/20





CONTENTS:

Introduction  										Page 3

Context and Performance                                                                                                   Page 4

Structure and Governance      							Page 6

Resources and Value for Money     							Page 7

Partnership Arrangements (Operations)						Page 9

Voice of the Child									Page 16

Thematic Delivery Areas								Page 17

GM Youth Justice Transformation 							Page 23

Risks to Future Delivery								Page 26

Future Priorities 									Page 27
      
Approval and sign off 									Page 28
      
Appendix: YJB Main Grant (Costed Plan)						Page 29

INTRODUCTION:

1.1	The Youth Justice Plan headlines achievements against last year's plan and outlines the priorities, opportunities and challenges for the coming year. The work of Stockport's youth justice service delivery is monitored through the Youth Offending Services Partnership Board (YOS PB), which in turn reports through the Children's Senior Management Team (SMT) and the Safer Stockport Partnership (SSP). Stockport Children's Safeguarding Board (SSCB) also receives updates and reports as required. The Youth Justice Plan is a key document on the Council's Forward Plan; therefore, it goes through full democratic processes for scrutiny and comment before final approval.

1.2	The Youth Offending Service (YOS) is a multi-agency service which focuses on Youth Justice and Targeted Youth Support; it includes local authority staff and employees seconded from our statutory partners including Health, Police, and Probation (NPS). The YOS also has strong links and partnership arrangements with a number of other key agencies, services and third sector organisations; such as GMCA (Greater Manchester Combined Authority), Housing, Social Care, Fire Service (GMFRS), Public Safety & Protection, HMCTS (Courts and Tribunal Service), and third sector organisations such as AIM, Respect, Coram Voice, CERA Ltd. and Remedi (Engaging and Empowering Victims) amongst others.

1.3	Section 40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 sets out the Youth Offending Partnership's responsibilities in producing this plan. It states that it is the duty of each local authority, after consultation with the partner agencies, to formulate and implement an annual youth justice plan, setting out: 
* How youth justice services in their area are to be provided and funded
* How the Youth Offending Service (YOS) will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out.

1.4	The Youth Justice Plan must be submitted to the Youth Justice Board (YJB) for England and Wales and published in accordance with the directions of the Secretary of State. 
CONTEXT AND PERFORMANCE: 

2.1   Together with its partners Stockport YOS continues to realign resources in order to meet service demand and the requirements of the wider public sector reform agenda, which ensures transformation of essential services in a more pragmatic and evidence-based way whilst contributing to necessary efficiency savings and promoting best practice. The YOS is part of the 'Stockport Family' integration, which has brought together colleagues across the whole of children's services and partners from the equivalent services within the NHS Foundation Trust.
2.2    The Youth Justice Board (YJB) is responsible for monitoring the following 3 performance areas and Youth Offending Partnerships in each Local Authority must submit quarterly information against each of them. These are:
* Reduction in First Time Entrants: (young people entering the criminal justice system for the first time, either before the court or receiving a caution)
* Reduction in Youth Re-Offending: (monitoring a select cohort of young people already in the youth justice system to determine if they re-offend, and if so, with what frequency)
* Reduction in the Use of Custody (reducing the numbers of young people who receive a custodial sentence in a Young Offenders Institution, Secure Training Centre or Secure Children's Home)
2.3    Although there isn't a specific target, each YOS Partnership needs to show that they have achieved a continued reduction against each measure and this is closely monitored by the YJB/MoJ. It is a condition of the YJB Grant that it is used to achieve positive reductions in the 3 performance areas. The data is publically available and published on a quarterly basis by the Ministry of Justice (MoJ).
2.4    Stockport YOS Partnership has managed to sustain and improve performance in some areas over the past 12 months when compared to other GM and North West authorities and nationally. The specific details for Stockport are:
2.5    The number of First Time Entrants (FTE) nationally has dramatically reduced when compared to baselines figures over 10 years ago and we have seen numbers start to plateau in the last few years. Over the past 3 years, Stockport FTE (Jan- Dec 2015 to Jan- Dec 18) has reduced from 74 to 61 (18.5%). However, this year has seen an increase of 17.3% from 52 last year to 61 this year. 
         	This year's FTE of 61 gives a Rate per 100,000 of 229, which is lower than both the National figure (236 per 100,000) and the North West total (243 per 100,000).
2.6    The Proven Rate of Re-offending. The latest national Proven Rate of Re-offending (Jul 16 - Jun 17) of 40.0% is notably lower than the equivalent prior year's figure of 50.6%.
         	Stockport has seen a decrease of 5.6% between this years' figure (33.3%) and that of the previous year (38.9%). This puts Stockport 6.7% below the national reoffending rate and also places us as the lowest binary re-offending rate in the North West.
          This year, Stockport has an offending cohort of 123 young people (reduced from 144 last year). The actual number of 're-offences' has also reduced to 234, from 293 last year. 
The result of having a smaller cohort of offenders is that it takes only a small increase in offending to significantly impact on the percentage change. The reduction in the cohort numbers shows the positive impact of early intervention programmes and effective triage and diversion, which gives us a very positive binary re-offending rate. The cohort of young people, however,  that do go on to re-offend, although reducing in number are still prolific and higher than we would want them to be; therefore we see fluctuating figures in the 'frequency' re-offending figure. This group of children and young people remain the most challenging, complex and hard to engage group within Stockport and the YOS Partnership Board have instructed a deep dive on the identified cases to be undertaken so that we can understand this cohort even better.  
2.7    The latest data issued from the YJB for Use of Custody shows that the number of young people from Stockport receiving custodial sentences in the year (Apr 18 - Mar 19) was 9. This compares to the same number of 9 the year before and 17 in the previous year.
        	Young people in custody often represent the highest risk and are often the most vulnerable group of young people in the criminal justice system. The 'Rate per 1,000 of the 10-17 population' was at a high point of 0.98 in the year ending March 2011 and has since reduced substantially. The Stockport rate per 1,000 of the youth population was 0.34 in the year to March 2019. This rate falls in between the most recent national rate of 0.30 and the North West rate of 0.37.
2.8	Stockport YOS Partnership Board and other key partnerships have been briefed on the national HMIP Inspection programme of Youth Justices Services and continue to work through the YOS and associated partners on learning and development in preparation.


STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE:    

3.1	The Youth Offending Service Partnership Board meets regularly. It is represented by senior partners from the key agencies that contribute to the YOS (Youth Justice and Targeted Youth Support) to ensure that youth justice and related interventions are delivered in partnership across the borough. 
3.2	Members of the YOS Partnership Board support the YOS in overcoming any barriers to effective multi-agency working.  The Terms of reference were reviewed again this year and ensure that the board receive regular information that enables them to make an effective contribution to delivering the key youth justice outcomes and also to hold the YOS and partners to account for their operational performance and outcomes. The Board operates a 'High Strength, High Challenge' model in line with Stockport Family principles for working with children and families.
3.3	The YOS Partnership Board held an induction workshop earlier in the year, in recognition of the fact that new members had joined as others had left, it also served as a refresher for existing members. The workshop was facilitated by the YJB and focused on roles and responsibilities of the Management Board and alignment to the revised National Standards, including the role of the Champion. This Chair receives regular reports in relation to the latest HMIP youth justice inspection reports, both individual and thematic. These are shared with the YOS Partnership Board as appropriate, however the findings contained within these and relevant JTAI reports are reviewed within the YOS Management Team (YMT) to improve performance and delivery as required. 
Current membership is well represented and comprised of:
* Director of Children's Services, Stockport Council (Chair)
* Cabinet Member (Children, Families & Education) Stockport Council
* Chief Inspector for Partnerships, GMP (Stockport Division)
* Director of Education Services, Stockport Council
* Head of Operations, NPS (Stockport & Tameside District) 
* Director of Place Management, Stockport Council
* Children's Commissioning Lead, NHS Stockport, CCG 
* Head of Neighbourhoods (Stockport Homes Group)
* Principal Lead (Children's Social Care & Commissioning) Stockport Council
* Deputy Chair of the GM Youth Court Bench, (HMCTS)
* Associate Director, Healthy Young Minds HYMS (Pennine Care)
* Service Lead, Youth Justice & Targeted Youth Support, Stockport Council

RESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY:

4.1	The Youth Justice Partnership contributions for 2018/19 are detailed below. 
*The YJB Grant Costed Plan is included at the end of the report in Appendix 1. 

AgencyStaffing costs (£)Payments in kind - revenue (£)Other delegated funds (£)Total (£)Local Authority 
£0£0£465,727£465,727Police Service£43,486In kind£0£43,486National Probation Service£21,743

In kind£5,000£26,743Health Service£43,486
In kind£0£43,486Police and Crime Commissioner (GMCA)
£0£0£45,000£45,000YJB Good Practice Grant£0£0£361,822£361,822Other***
YJB (JAC)
YJB (Remand)
GMCA (EYIF)
Unitas (Arts)
£0
£0
£0
                      £0
£0
£0
£0
                       £0
£33,013
£24,452
£30,000
£8,781

£66,246Total£111,699£0£973,795£1,082,510

Stockport Youth Justice and Targeted Youth Support Services (YOS) 2019

PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS (OPERATIONS):
5.1 	Youth Justice and Targeted Youth Support Services are comprised of the following areas, which all contribute to the effective delivery of YOS partnership delivery across the Borough.
* Youth Justice: statutory provision for children and young people within the criminal justice system)
* Early Intervention: up to 12 month bespoke voluntary engagement working with young people who are at risk of entering the civil or criminal justice system. Focuses on diversion and engagement.
* Targeted Youth Support: a short-term (3 month) voluntary engagement to educate, inform and divert children and young people from behaviour that could place them at risk. This includes crime awareness and specific work with schools.
* Anti-Social Behaviour: civil enforcement and partnership interventions with children and young people causing youth disorder and harm in communities.


















YOUTH JUSTICE:
5.2 	The following interventions are just some of the statutory functions undertaken through the YOS Partnership to ensure that children and young people receiving criminal interventions proportionate to their offence and ongoing support that will prevent them from re-offending:
Out of Court Disposals (OOCD): are delivered in a partnership approach between GMP and the YOS to divert young people involved in low level offending behaviour from entering the formal criminal justice system. Following an initial joint triage assessment by the YOS and GMP, young people are offered the opportunity to engage in restorative justice, and if necessary, access additional voluntary support offered through the YOS.  If the young person successfully engages in an offence-focused intervention, they will avoid a criminal record.  The intention of this process is better information-sharing between GMP and YOS, improved victim confidence and satisfaction and ultimately a further reduction in FTE. The process for Youth Cautions and Youth Conditional Cautions is now fully embedded and all referrals from GMP are checked by the YOS Police Officer to ensure that they are relevant referrals. Assessments are completed on all these cases to assess the young person's needs and a gatekeeping meeting is held, which includes the YOS Police Officer and Victim worker. Court Officers identify cases in Court which should have been considered for an OOCD. The YOS also form part of the GM scrutiny panel which reviews cases on a quarterly basis from across GM to ensure that the correct processes have been followed and the right outcome achieved.

Referral Order Community Panels: The YOS have a team of 9 volunteers fully trained in Restorative Justice and Mediation Skills to operate  'Referral Order Community Panels', which facilitate and agree a community contract with the young person and their family when they receive a 'Referral Order'. The training has maximised their skills and increased the opportunity for direct mediation. Plans are still in place for a Greater Manchester consortium of Referral Order Panel members that will all be trained to the same standard allowing a greater number of Panel members to work across the region.  Offering standardised training for Panel Members will offer greater consistency to those young people made subject to Referral Order who move between neighbouring Local Authorities.  Recruitment of new Panel members is anticipated to be held in late Autumn 2019 in order to increase our pool of trained volunteers and with it a greater cross-section of the Stockport community.

Unpaid Work (UPW): The delivery of of Unpaid Work (Community Service) for 16/17 year olds is devolved to the YOS. The court can make an order with a requirement to complete between 40 and 240 hours UPW (minimum 4 hours per week for those in ETE and at least 16 hours per week for those not in ETE).  In addition to the community benefit UPW offers it has an additional focus on providing the young person life-long learning, social engagement and interaction and transferable skills that can provide improved employability skills.  In light of this the YOS has developed its 'Reparation and Unpaid Work Project Portfolio' and now works restoratively with 12 projects including Cheadle Mosque, Wellspring Homeless Centre, Manchester Rugby Club and Woodbank Community Centre.  A part-time Restorative Justice Co-ordinator, commissioned through Remedi, is responsible for sourcing new projects, undertaking risk assessments and acting as a single point of contact for all community reparation and Unpaid Work projects.

Junior Attendance Centre (JAC): The Junior Attendance Centre runs once a fortnight and can be part of a court order requirement. Stockport YOS currently commission The School of Military to provide educational and physical activities for young people at the Junior Attendance Centre, supported by YOS staff. The School of Military aim to enhance the educational experience of all the young people they work with, placing them outside of their comfort zone and helping them reach and exceed their potential, by instilled respect and discipline into their daily lives.
The YOS continue to spot purchase the Cycloan project and other bike-related activities through CERACYCLOAN Ltd. who provide restorative and educational opportunities for young people to make good and learn new skills. Bicycles are donated to the project from a variety of sources, including the police, and are than restored and given to people in need, including victims of crime. 

Custody, Remand & Resettlement: The main custodial institution that young people receiving a custodial sentence or remand are sent to is HMYOI Wetherby. It is recognised that Wetherby YOI is some distance from Greater Manchester, and that parents and carers struggle to make the journey due to the limited transport access.  This is a real concern and discussed on a regular basis at the Greater Manchester Resettlement Forum.  All children and young people who are received into the Secure Estate are given supervision through the YOS whilst serving their sentence, this is done in line with National Standards and based on the specific individual need of the young person.  From point of entry plans are put in place which are working towards the young person's resettlement, including accommodation and education and training opportunities as appropriate. GMCA has funded a full-time Senior Social Worker based in HMYOI Wetherby, to specifically review the safeguarding needs of young people placed there from Greater Manchester (this averages about 60 young people). Stockport, along with the other GM authorities, receives monthly reports on the progress of young people in the custodial estate, this is also monitored locally at a GM level and through the Leeds Safeguarding Children's Board (LSCB).  As well as Wetherby YOI Stockport young people are also received into Secure Childrens Home and Secure Training Centres at various locations across England and Wales.  Young people entered into these facilities are given the same supervision as those within the YOI estate.  

Serious Incident Process: The YJB used to operate the CSPPI (Community Safeguarding and Public Protection Incidents) process to ensure that the incidents meeting the criteria below followed the required reporting procedure if a child or young person is:
* Charged with committing a 'defined' public protection offence, including those young people not under YOS supervision when they were charged. 
* Involved in a safeguarding incident while on the YOS caseload or up to 20 calendar days following the end of YOT supervision. 


Case Planning Forums (CPF): All AssetPlus assessments are countersigned by a Youth Justice Team Leader, which ensures enhanced oversight for all cases, including OOCD and Voluntary Support cases. The multi-agency CPF forums ensure that all children and young people under YOS supervision who are assessed as High Risk of Serious Harm, High risk of re-offending or High Risk to safety and Well-Being are reviewed through the CPF and these are scheduled on a fortnightly basis.

Restorative Justice (RJ): Restorative Justice and Reparation are key requirements for all young people working with the YOS; they form part of every AssetPlus and Onset assessment and can be a requirement within a Court Order as directed by Magistrates and Community Panel members. All victims of crime are contacted and offered an intervention; Face to Face contact with the offender is the first and foremost starting point of Restorative Justice.  However, many victims prefer to choose from a portfolio of Community Reparation projects designed to give back to the local community. The projects are also put together in order to offer the offender a chance to gain transferable skills for the future. The YOS work flexibly, seven days a week, to ensure that Restorative Justice and Reparation are completed when it is needed and required.
The YOS commission Remedi (a specialist Restorative Justice provider) to oversee young people's engagement in making good their behaviour. Remedi provide a fully trained Restorative Justice Practitioner to engage with all identified victims. Since 1st April 2018 contact has been made with 151 victims. Of these, 82 victims have responded with 46 victims choosing to participate in indirect Restorative Justice and 18 victims wanting to participate in direct Restorative Justice. The Restorative Justice Practitioner has, in total, completed 9 direct and 83 indirect in this period. Restorative Justice can take place on all active interventions; from early intervention triage to custodial sentences.  During this period 94 victim awareness sessions have been undertaken.  Victims involved in the process have expressed satisfaction and felt that it was a great opportunity for them to meet the young person that committed an offence against them and be able to discuss this and the effects that an offence had on themselves and others.

Transitions: The YOS continue to work to the 'Joint National Protocol for Transitions in England' and resources remain at 0.5 fte. We now have strong links with both NPS and CRC to allow for a good transition process for young people moving into adulthood.

EARLY INTERVENTION & TARGETED YOUTH SUPPORT:
5.3	Early intervention offers a bespoke package of up to 12 month intervention to children and young people to ensure effective diversion is put in place that will deter them from escalating into statutory services. Targeted Youth Support (TYS) is a shorter intervention, up to 3 months, which focuses on specific types of behaviour and offers interventions to children, young people, families and within schools. Both forms of intervention are voluntary and consent must be sought from the young person and their carer before engagement. This ensures that the needs of vulnerable children and young people are identified early and met by agencies and third sector partners working together effectively, in ways that are shaped by the views and experiences of young people themselves. 

5.4	The YOS has been given the lead for TYS and this has gathered real momentum by ensuring a wide range of voluntary community-based programmes are delivered to children and young people who are referred to the service.  TYS builds upon the successful YOS prevention strategy, delivers crime prevention programme in schools and a range of interventions to children and young people identified as being at risk of offending or anti-social behaviour, on the periphery of organised crime groups and other risky lifestyles. These interventions include football programmes, boxing projects, outreach and diversion activities and other locally devised schemes that all have the same aim of engaging young people, improving their life skills and preventing them becoming engaged in civil or criminal behaviour.

Knife Crime: The use of weapons and knifes is an escalating national problem and one that it having a devastating impact on young people's lives. The YOS, in collaboration with Greater Manchester Police, have developed a Knife Crime Strategy that looks to address the issue within the borough through a tiered intervention approach through a programme called 'On The Edge'. It is delivered universally to all secondary schools, group-based work for those young people identified as posing an increased risk of becoming involved in such behaviour and robust and targeted 1-2-1 work to those young people either convicted or police-led intelligence proving that such behaviour is taking place.  The aim of this strategy is to ensure that children and young people are made fully aware of the consequences of carrying offensive weapons. 
A joint bid was put together through GM for the Home Office Serious Violence Reduction funding and we have recently been informed that this was successful.  Devolved through Community Safety Partnerships this will enable Stockport to build upon and enhance and embed some of the existing initiatives we have in place, with the main aim being on providing additional support and intervention to primary schools.   In Spring and Summer 2019 school terms, over 2,000 secondary school children in the borough have received knife crime awareness sessions delivered by Youth Justice Officers and GMP (Stockport division). The programme continues to be evolved in time for the autumn term and we have recently secured the involvement of a local Stockport resident, who is also a trauma surgeon working for Salford Royal, who has agreed to jointly deliver on the programme.

Serious Youth Violence: The details set out within the knife crime awareness programme form part of the wider Serious Youth Violence approach. Stockport YOS works closely with GMCA and GM Youth Justice colleagues in monitoring activity and intervening effectively. GMCA-commissioned analytics over a 5 year period has been invaluable in showing trend data.

The recent Home Office funding awarded to GMCA through the Serious Violence Reduction funding has been devolved through the 10 GM Community Safety Partnerships and a local delivery plan drawn up and approved. This complements the aligned funding that has been awarded to GMP through Project Sycamore and in Stockport a detailed partnership plan is in place. 


Crime Prevention (School-Based): YOS have devised a programme that is delivered in primary and secondary schools and has been delivered to 500 children this academic year. It continues to be rolled out to schools and is delivered in the form of a 'drop down day. Schools are able to request bespoke programmes dependent on local need as required.  


Summer Arts Programme: The YOS were successful in securing national funding through Unitas to run a Summer Arts programme again this year. This offers an intense programme over the summer holidays developing a range of skills in a number of art mediums. This year's programme focuses on an anti-knife message and the young people will produce artwork using decommissioned knives (recovered by GMP) and anti-stab vests.   
This programme is targeted at children and young people who were assessed as likely to cause harm and distress within their communities over the holiday period and aims to ensure that are fully occupied. Those young people who complete the course will be presented with a certificate at an award ceremony, which their parents/carers can also attend, at Stockport College.










ANTI-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR:
6.1  Community safety interventions for children and young people at risk of becoming involved in civil enforcement and potentially criminal behaviour is supported through Public, Safety and Protection and predominantly managed through the YOS, which is reflective of the disproportionate nature of youth disorder when compared to other crime and civil disorder trends .

ASB/Youth Disorder: Together with police colleagues the YOS has taken an active lead for youth Anti-Social Behaviour (ASB). Children and young people identified as causing ASB are now the subject of discussion at multi-agency panel, where appropriate actions and engagement are agreed, which includes civil enforcement as appropriate. 

ASB and Youth Disorder feature in both statutory youth justice provision and in the early intervention work. The GMCA Community Safety Grant has funded a wide range of programmes and diversionary activities that have impacted on ASB reduction. We work closely with partners within Public Safety and Protection (PSP) and Stockport Homes (SHG) in developing recommendations for civil enforcement and court action as necessary. Both the Police, SHG and Place are represented at a senior level on the YOS Partnership Board.


Youth Disorder Panel: This panel meets monthly and is a full day multi-agency meeting co-chaired by Neighbourhood Police Sergeants and YOS Team Leader. The day is broken down into 5 geographical sections to reflect neighbourhood policing areas and relevant staff attend to present on their own areas. The police provide up-to-date intelligence to the meeting which provides a 'ladder of intervention' identifying young people and incidents that have occurred. It will also highlight hotspot areas.

Based on the initial guidance set out in the ASB Strategy, which developed a traffic light system, children and young people are identified and discussed dependent on the amount of ASB they are alleged to involved in. A joint action plan is devised and reviewed and this can range from a 'light touch' visit to the parental home, through to implementing a range of civil injunctions, including court action, to prevent the ASB. The RAG system was adopted with the intention of intervening where necessary at the appropriate level and enabling risk to be identified and signposted as required. This system also allows for de-escalation and children and young people will be removed from the 'ladder of intervention' if the ASB/Youth Disorder decreases.





VOICE OF THE CHILD:
7.1	The YOS Diversity and Participation Group is being revised to implement the Youth Feedback Forum which allows young people to give their views about the service, the criminal justice system and issues that affect them in their local area. These forums will be held regularly throughout the year to ensure that consultation with children and young people is central to decision-making about service development. Feedback has previously been gathered from children and young people and their parents/carers via an end order process. YOS Team Leaders undertake a final appointment with young people to gather their views and a Business Support Team Leader contacts all parents/carers at the end of an intervention.  In addition to this a functionality has become available in ChildView (the youth justice case management system). 
7.2	The commitment to hearing the 'voice of the child' has been further developed and Coram Voice, a national agency who specialise in participatory work, have been commissioned to provide an independent worker for 15 hrs per week to work with children and young people engaged with the YOS.  The Participation Worker is now in post and engaging young people to form a Young Person's Participation Board.  She will also sit on the regularly held YOS Participation and Diversity meetings and ensure that information is disseminated through operational management and practitioners to inform and shape delivery. The contract also requires regular evaluation reports which will be presented at the YOS Partnership Board.  
7.3	Peer Mentors who are ex-offenders work with the service and been supported through a 10 week Peer Mentoring programme.  They are matched with suitable young people and develop a relationship to offer support, help build esteem, confidence and life skills with a role model who has had similar experiences. This is done in conjunction with colleagues in Mosaic (Young Person's Drug and Alcohol Service). 
7.4	The GMCA Community Safety Grant has enabled us to commission a diversion and outreach service, though 'Families Against Violence' (FAV) who deliver interventions at peak times in hotspot areas and also work with one of the Pupil Referral Units. FAV presented to the YOS Partnership Board recently with a particular focus on the Voice of the Child.
7.3	Together with Life Leisure and Stockport Homes the YOS form part of the programme board to administer the £500k Reaching our Communities successful lottery bid. FAV are commissioned through this bid and the project also enables young people, 3rd sector organisations and charities to bid for small pots of funding to develop community based projects to engage young people in diversionary activities.


THEMATIC DELIVERY AREAS:
8.1 	These are cross-cutting delivery areas that transverse several service areas and are delivered in partnership with other agencies.
Education: Stockport YOS are committed to working with partner agencies to ensure that all our children and young people are accessing the best and most appropriate Education Training and Employment.  The YOS Education Officer now has a base within the Education and Careers Guidance Service and works with those young people who are known to both services, especially working with those young people 16+ that are NEET. This officer also spends one day a week at Highfields PRU.  This is to better integrate our two services, offer bespoke support to an education provider with the highest proportion of our client base and to encourage greater attendance of those said young people. 
The YOS Education Officer works directly with local schools, attending 'Team Around the School' meetings to ensure that each school is receiving appropriate support from Youth Justice and Targeted Youth Support (TYS).
As well as the work in the community, the YOS Education Officer attends specific planning meetings within the Secure Custodial Estate, to ensure adequate information is communicated and resettlement actions are devised in a joint way.
The TYS Team deliver regular 'drop-down' crime awareness days in schools and a Headteacher is represented on the Youth Disorder Panel. The Director for Education Services sits on the YOS Partnership Board with the last Board meeting having a thematic review of Education

Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND): There has been a particular focus through the YOS Partnership to ensure that the special needs of children and young people in the criminal justice system are recognised and intervention offered as needed. 
'Achievement for ALL' are a national organisation, who amongst other areas have developed a focus on SEND and Youth Justice. They created a benchmarking tool which allowed services to self-assess themselves and submit their findings with the aim of achieving a 'Quality Mark' or 'Quality Lead' status if all the benchmarking requirements were met. The YOS Partnership set themselves the target of meeting the 'Quality Mark' by March 2019 and were successful in meeting the criteria for the award in September 2018. The next step is to reach the 'Quality Lead', it is anticipated that this will be achieved by March 2020.
Funding was made available through GMCA for early intervention in Youth Justice and as Stockport YOS had a well-developed prevention programme in TYS, it was agreed that this grant would be better utilised in developing a bespoke Health & SEND provision. This culminated in spot purchasing arrangements for a Speech and Language Therapist, an Education Psychologist, a Parenting Worker and a School Nurse.
A Specialist Speech and Language Therapist (SALT) works in the service (two days per week) This practitioner sits within the service and is working directly with our children and young people that have been identified as having significant speech, language and communicational needs (SLCN).  This cohort of young people are identified through thorough assessment using AssetPlus and additional screening tools adapted through SALT.  This offer is available to all young people within the service regardless of the intervention being provided. The therapist is also working closely with the service offering advice, support and consultation about how to work with those people not meeting the threshold for intervention but do have some SLCN.
An Educational Psychologist works within the service on a commissioned basis to ensure the specific needs of offenders are addressed, as well as jointly delivering bespoke programmes for parents. 
Case managers within the YOS are more familiar with the process of Education, Health and Care Plans (EHCP) and aim to be involved in the reviews of all of our young people currently provided with an EHCP.  This is supported by the on-site Information Advice and Guidance Team and the SEN Business Support Team.

Mental Health: Every young person is screened at the beginning of his or her involvement with the service and this is continually reviewed. For those young people admitted to the secure custodial estate a current emotional and physical health assessment is undertaken on admittance. Healthy Young Minds (HYMS) second a full-time Mental Health Practitioner to the service and Pennine Care are represented at a senior level on the YOS Partnership Board. There are a number of initiatives at a GM level to co-ordinate health and justice provision and there is an increased emphasis on neurological and brain-related trauma. 
The Mentally Vulnerable Offender Panel (MVOP) is a fortnightly panel attended by the YOS Mental Health Practitioner and/or Youth Justice Team Leader and reviews young people and adults in order to make recommendations to the Courts to either divert or charge.  The Youth Triage process ensures identification of these young people at an earlier juncture either at point of arrest or whilst in the custody suite. MVOP is also the subject of a GM review which Stockport YOS are involved in.

Physical Health: Stockport Family arrangements have enhanced working arrangements with school nurses, improved information-sharing and health screening and an agreement for missed immunisations by those young people who are NEET can be provided by the school nursing team. The YOS now commission a seconded school nurse one day a week during term-time.  She accesses health information, screens young people around any health issues, immunises when young people miss their scheduled immunisations and arrange medication for example ADHD tablets.  

Parental Support: The YOS are responsible for the management of Parenting Orders made within the criminal courts and therefore packages of support and enforcement are in place to ensure that voluntary programmes are available for parents who require it and that orders are managed effectively and progress reports are provided to the courts as required. Parenting support is also identified when civil enforcement for ASB is being considered and additional packages of support may be put in place before the case comes to court to enable the parent to assist in desistance. 
The YOS spot purchase a 0.2 fte Parenting Worker to deliver individual packages of support and to be part of the delivery team for RESPECT Domestic Abuse programme. 

Trauma-Informed Practice: The YOS have developed a training programme delivered jointly between the Educational Psychologist (who is a trauma specialist) and the Parenting Worker (who is mental health trained) to ensure that staff are fully aware of the impact of Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE's) and their manifestation in later life with some of the young people they are working with. This has been followed by an ongoing intervention programme, which includes staff clinical supervision and screening of all young people coming into the service.  Psychologist is a specialist in trauma so works with young people who are displaying of severe trauma.

Complex & Contextual Safeguarding: Safeguarding of children and young people is integral to the work of the YOS and evidenced in all our assessments, programmes and interventions. Strong links are in place with our partners, particularly Children's Social Care (CSC).  The YOS is represented on the Integrated Placements and Education Panel (IPEP), where the movement of Stockport LA Children is discussed regarding accommodation and education.   A Youth Justice Team Leader also sits on the Accommodation Panel where discussions are held regarding Care Leavers and the direct support that is needed to help them in this transition. All young people are screened as part of their assessment for vulnerability. 
At a strategic level the YOS Management Team are represented through the Stockport Safeguarding Children's Partnership arrangements and the associated safeguarding sub-groups where they make an active contribution. At a GM level protocols are in place across authorities regarding the movement and transfer and caretaking of cases within the youth justice system and the YOS are part of the GM Training Partnership which ensures safeguarding is embedded within its training programmes. There are specific areas of vulnerability that warrant particular attention and a strong co-ordinated approach with partners, particularly the police, to ensure young people are safeguarded, these include:  
The YOS contribute a 0.4 Officer into the Aspire (Complex Safeguarding) Team within the MASSH and we are represented on the strategic Complex Safeguarding Board. Youth Justice Team Leaders sit on a number of groups including the Staying Safe Panel and CSE Forum. These functions are replicated at a practice level and all relevant staff are trained on the Phoenix Tool to identify child sexual exploitation (CSE).
Missing From Home (MFH): There are a significant number of young people open to the YOS who are placed here by 'Other Local Authorities (OLA's). Due to the chaotic lifestyles and complexities that these young people have experienced they tend to contribute to a high proportion of the 'missing from home' incidents reported to the police. The YOS have been active in supporting the development of the Missing Hub within the MASSH, which ensures that actions relating to missing children are co-ordinated centrally and the YOS has a dedicated SW resource that acts as the central point for liaison. 

Child Criminal Exploitation (CCE): Learning from our Manchester neighbours and working across the GM conurbation, Stockport is involved in a CCE-Mapping exercise, which has heightened our understanding of peers, associations and triggers that identifies children living in Stockport at risk. A full training module has been developed across GM, led by Rochdale and the GM Complex Safeguarding Lead. Discussions are taking place between services regarding screening and referral pathways locally. One of the Youth Justice SW's leads for the service on CCE.

Substance Misuse: YOS in partnership with MOSAIC (young people's substance misuse service) run bespoke drug and alcohol awareness sessions for young people identified as requiring such a service. We work particularly closely with Mosaic in increasing awareness amongst case managers regarding emerging substances that young people may be using to ensure that they can signpost young people for appropriate support. Young people are also referred on with regard to smoking cessation issues. All young people who require it are offered support to address their substance misuse and an age-appropriate screening tool is completed with all young people, this screening tool now sits within AssetPlus which gives more efficiency to the process.

Preventing Violent Extremism (PVE): Changes brought in through the 'Counter-Terrorism Act 2015' and 'Prevent Duty Guidance' requires Channel and Prevent to be statutory functions within all local authorities. The YOS are an active member of the 'Channel Panel', attending all Panel Meetings and offering advice and guidance on any children and young people open to Channel.  The YOS have previously commissioned intervention providers, and whilst there are no current arrangements in place around this, it is an option that we would utilise again should it be required.  All YOS staff have completed an online workshop around PVE to recognise the early signs and vulnerabilities of young people being susceptible to extremism. In addition to this all staff have completed Level 2 training around PVE delivered by the Prevent Police Officer for Stockport.  Furthermore, a YOS Team Leader and Case Manager are both trainers of this level 2 training after completing a 'Train the Trainer' course and have delivered this across the council.

Hate Crime:  Stockport YOS are one of the members the Hate Crime Steering group and have been involved in the direction and implementation of specific messages being delivered to the community.  Working with Remedi, a RJ-commissioned service, a lead practitioner has recently undertaken a significant piece of work around Hate Crime, which led to the development of a short film being made which offers a real insight into how Hate Crime impacts on victims and the community as a whole.  This intervention is available to all children and young people that have been identified as linked to Hate Crime whether it be as an offence-related incident or through held beliefs, thoughts, words or actions.  Stockport YOS are one of the key stakeholders in delivering the inaugural full day conference across the borough looking specifically at this issue; this is due to take place in Feb 2020.

Domestic Abuse: The YOS continue to deliver the RESPECT programme, a nationally accredited model that works directly with families and young people where there is adolescent abuse in a domestic setting. Additionally the YOS work with young people who are experiencing domestic abuse in close relationships. RESPECT is a group-led programme but an individual package of support can also be tailored as appropriate. The YOS have negotiated with Stockport Families First to expand the pool, staff have now been trained and the first RESPECT programme has now been delivered jointly. The benefit of working with Stockport Families First is that we can also focus on families where this behaviour results in the young person being accommodated or at risk of being placed in care. The YOS are represented at a senior level on the Domestic Abuse Steering Group.

Quality Assurance (QA): The process of QA continues to be revised to improve practice. The AssetPlus QA tool is used as an oversight tool on statutory cases and a locally developed tool for early intervention cases.   In addition, working with Business Intelligence colleagues, we have also commissioned 'Tableau' to create dashboards and 'Captcha' to assist in deep dives.
 Stockport YOS are involved in the implementation of a nationwide Operational Manager Quality Assurance Training Programme.  Devised in conjunction with the Youth Justice Sector Improvement Programme (YJSIP) and supported by the Association of YOS Managers (AYM).  The first of these training programmes was delivered in the North West in July 2019 and will be rolled out nationally from Autumn 2019. One of Stockport's YJ Team Leaders was represented on the national group and delivers the training.
Working with colleagues from Salford and Oldham the same trainers who were involved in the national programme have also developed bespoke practitioner training for the purpose and function of AssetPlus. This has been rolled out across the 10 GM authorities.



HMI Inspectorate & Audit: HMI Probation (HMIP) are the lead inspectorate for inspecting statutory Youth Justice Services. A new inspection regime has been devised and this went live in May 2018. HMIP requested to use Stockport YOS as a training base for the completion of their own HMIP Inspector Training Programme.  They had two separate training inspections in Spring 2018 over a 2 week period and informal feedback was shared which was positive and also gave areas for development. We found these training inspections to be of great help in allowing us to have an external view of our service provision and provided us with expert advice on how we could work to achieve better outcomes for our children and young people
The HMI inspections are being called on a regular basis and they either consist on a one week inspection led by HMIP, or a 3 week Full Joint Inspection; which also involves Ofsted, CQC and HMFRS. Our GM neighbours, Manchester were subject to an inspection over a 3 week period  and Oldham were subject to a full week. Learning has been disseminated  from the findings now they are published, particularly as a large proportion of our work is GM based.
A number of audits for HMIP readiness have taken place; another GM Peer Review took place over the summer, which the Youth Justice Team Leaders led on, an internal audit took place against HMIP benchmarking and a service development day has been scheduled to review the current position and raise awareness. The findings have been reported to the YOS Partnership Board and a paper is scheduled to go to the Corporate Leadership Team (CLT).
















GM YOUTH JUSTICE TRANSFORMATION:
9.1	Under the wider GM children's transformation programme there is a dedicated thematic area specifically for youth justice. This complements the joint working that has been established over a number of years through the GM Youth Justice Heads of Service and associated operational functions. GMCA provide a programme officer to support the work streams.

Serious Youth Violence: GMCA through the Mayor's Office have successfully bid for the Home Office Serious Violence Reduction funding and been awarded £4.5 million. This has been devolved to GMP (predominantly for police overtime) and a large proportion to GM Community Safety Partnerships (CSP) across the 10 GM local authorities. This is short-term funding to 2020 based on the criteria below that focuses predominantly on children and young people: 
1. Work with education settings (including primary, secondary, alternative provision, further education and pupil referral units) to keep pupils safe and reduce the likelihood of fixed term and permanent exclusions.
2. Targeted youth justice prevention and desistence programmes.
3. Mentoring, coaching or other forms of targeted interventions with children and young people at risk of involvement in violence or knife carrying.
4. Positive youth activities, including outreach work, in communities most affected by violent crime.
5. Action to identify and prosecute irresponsible retailers who sell knives and other weapons to children and young people.
Stockport CSP have developed an action plan which has been approved by the GM Deputy Mayor and are well placed to 'enhance and embed' existing provision that has successfully targeted a number of these areas and this funding ensures this can continue throughout the next financial year.

Disproportionality:  GMCA have worked with the 10 GM Youth Justice partnerships to develop a data-sharing agreement that has enabled 5 years of information to be made available for analysis to review trends and inform and shape service delivery. Individual analytic packs have been prepared for each GM YJ Partnership.
One specific area that the GM Heads of YOS requested was a deep dive into disproportionality data, by division, to enable us to review the numbers of children and young people coming through the youth justice system by ethnicity, gender, age and defined cultural group.

Out of Court Disposal (OOCD): The GM Early Help & Diversion workstream aims to develop a consistent and standardised approach to ensure that all young people who receive an OOCD are offered the option to engage and comply, regardless of where they live, and that the same consequences are in place should they choose not to engage.  Working with GMP colleagues centrally in the Criminal Justice Unit at Force HQ has enabled a system to be developed that encourages and increases engagement amongst young people at the earliest possible opportunity to prevent escalation of offending behaviour.
The YOS also form part of the GM scrutiny panel, which reviews cases on a quarterly basis from across GM to ensure that the correct processes have been followed and the right outcome achieved.

GM Youth Courts: The main court now operates in Manchester City whilst Stockport still operate a youth court, one day a week, from Stockport Magistrates Court, and pick up additional work from East Cheshire and the High Peak. The GM Youth Court Bench co-ordinates youth magistrates provision across GM. Management of the Saturday/Bank Holiday bail and remand courts are shared across GM and Stockport YOS are actively involved. Stockport is represented on the GM Youth Court Users Group and the GM Deputy Chair of the Youth Bench sits on the YOS Partnership Board.

Children in Police Custody: GMP have adopted the National Child-Centred Policing Model, and 'children in police custody' is first area under the Spotlight. The Head of Youth Justice for Stockport is the GM lead for all 10 LA's in overseeing 'children in police on behalf of the other GM Youth Justice Services.
By challenging existing practice in the overnight detention of children in police custody it is ensuring that more child-focussed practice is adopted across GM. This has included a GM multi-agency meeting, joint action plan and a training programme for custody sergeants across GMP. The recent refurbishment plans of Longsight Custody Suite has been informed by the group, to ensure that children/vulnerability cells are separated from the main wing and to ensure safeguarding remains as the number one priority. 
The GM contract for appropriate Adult Services is led by Stockport on behalf of GM and the current provider for children and vulnerable adults in police custody is Child Action North West (CANW). This operates everyday, including evening and weekends and continues to be well received by GMP colleagues and other custody suite staff, as it provides a single point of contact.
GMCA have commissioned a GM-wide Integrated Health Liaison and Diversion Partnership (IHLDP) to operate within all the GM Custody Suites and the Magistrates Courts. Trained mental health nurses assess each person for their mental health needs and liaison workers then divert them through to appropriate service. 

Health and Justice: The GM Health and Justice Strategic Board have highlighted the health needs of children and young people in the youth justice system as one of 3 priority areas. GM Heads of Youth Justice Services are active involved in commissioning discussions for trauma-based programmes, speech and language provision and mental health input.

Custody and Resettlement: Greater Manchester Resettlement Forum, which Stockport YOS attends, meets regularly to review the custody and resettlement needs of GM children and young people in the secure estate. GMCA continue to joint fund a full-time Senior Social Worker based in HMYOI Wetherby, to specifically review the safeguarding needs of young people.

Association of YOT Managers (AYM): Not under the jurisdiction of GM, the AYM is a well-regarded national professional body for Youth Justice Managers in England. The association is able to draw on the wealth of knowledge and breadth of experience to promote public understanding and shape youth crime policy. Stockport is represented on the AYM and the Head of Service is the NW Regional Lead for the association and as a Director sits on the National Executive.

Sector-Led Improvement: The Youth Justice Sector Improvement programme (YJSIP) is a partnership between the Association of YOT Managers (AYM), the Youth Justice Sector and the Youth Justice Board (YJB) and is governed through the AYM Executive.
YJSIP is committed to sector improvement investment and development offers several programmes of training and development to youth justice professional. It has developed an expertise in Peer Reviews, based on the LGA model, and offers at least 4 Peer Reviews a year throughout England & wales, delivered through trained YJ professionals. This have been undertaken and well received by almost 50 local authority Youth Justice Partnerships and the programme has been subject to academic evaluation.







RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY:
10.1 	As detailed above Stockport YOS Partnership is actively involved in a number of GM developments that have impacted on the way we deliver services across the conurbation. This has created both opportunities and challenges. The GM Children's Services Review, and specifically the Youth Justice Transformation programme has led to greater collaboration, joint commissioning and integration. 
10.2	The risks to delivery against the 3 national outcome measures of Reducing First Time Entrants, Reducing Re-offending and Reducing the Use of Custody is seen through the lens of delivery in a multi-faceted professional environment. This includes the Stockport Family integration, the Community Safety Partnership delivery model, the GMCA transformation programmes and national drivers through changes in the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) and the Youth Justice Board (YJB). 
10.3	The delivery of core statutory youth justice functions is both supported and impacted by all of the above and currently the greatest risk to delivery is the double-edged sword of additional funding that has been made available nationally, some of which has been devolved through GMCA. This has been welcomed but it comes in the form of short-term ring-fenced grants each of which require audit and returns and often only last for less than one year. Core budgets however continue to be reduced. The ability to build sustainability in this climate continues to be challenging whilst there is no long-term funding confirmed. 
















Stockport YOS Partnership Board
Priorities 2019/20PriorityReasonActionExpected outcomeSerious Youth ViolenceIncreasing levels of violence being evidenced across GM and locally in StockportWork with GMP Violence Reduction Unit to embed strategies and delivery models across the borough.Reduction in
Serious Youth Violence.
Safer Communities. Fewer victims.Knife Crime AwarenessRaise awareness of impact and consequent within education settings.Roll out the existing programme across all schools and educational establishments within the borough. 
Develop a parenting/carer programme.Reduced knife crime.
Increased awareness with children, parents and carers.
Train the trainer model.
Embed within PHSE curriculum.
Trauma-Informed WorkforceIncreased awareness regarding Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE's).Ensure that the workforce are actively working in a trauma-informed way and fully informed on the impact of ACE's. All practice staff deliver services in a trauma-informed way to achieve the greatest  impact with children and young people.Child Criminal ExploitationCCE mapping identified children at risk of CCE at multiple ages and thresholds.CCE-Mapping across GM to understand local and cross-border activity. Reduction in children experiencing exploitation.Voice of the ChildA more child-friendly approach to inform and shape services based on lived experiences.Intervention plan needs to be informed by Participation Strategy and User Panel.More effective services that are responsive to the needs of children and families.SEND Quality 
MarkContinue to enhance SEND provision within Youth JusticeWork with GM Health & Justice Board to improve SALT and MHP provision.Achieve SEND (AQA) Quality Mark benchmarkEntrenched Cases ReviewComplex cases need renewed oversight and intervention plan to ensure effectiveness,Review Reoffending (Frequency) through Deep Dive & develop Peer Review processesFewer complex and entrenched cases who re-offend.
APPROVAL AND SIGN OFF:

Signed:




Chris McLoughlin 
Director of Children's Services (Stockport Council)
Chair of the YOS Partnership Board















Jacqui Belfield-Smith
Service Lead: Youth Justice & Targeted Youth Support



Date: Date pending final approval (post-democratic consultation process)



Appendix 1:

STOCKPORT YOS (Youth Justice & Targeted Youth Support): 
YJB Good Practice Main Grant funding 2019/20 (not YJB JAC or Remand Grants)
Section 41(5) of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 sets out that the YJB has the power to make grants, with the approval of the Secretary of State, to Local Authorities or other bodies to develop good practice and commission research to such practice. The grant is given in order to contribute towards achieving the following outcomes:
* Reduction in youth re-offending
* Reduction in first time entrants
* Reduction in the use of youth custody

In order to satisfy audit requirements YOS partnerships need to demonstrate that the grant is spent on activity which relates to the terms of the Act, developing good practice and research.
'Developing good practice' can include both new developments and improving existing areas of work. The grant can be used for this period but should be transferred to other funding streams once it becomes business as usual.
'Research' can include any cost relating to new enquiries or work to establish an evidence base to support interventions that contribute to effective practice.
£362k









Outcome IndicatorAreas for improvement/developmentActivityIndicative CostReducing Reoffending
Reducing Use of CustodyDevelop analysis, programmes and interventions to address cohorts that have been identified through YOS dashboards.Deliver targeted interventions that specifically relate to young people identified in the re-offending cohort and those with factors that place them at risk of entering the cohort. Develop programmes through YOS specialist officers. £32kReducing Reoffending
Reducing First Time EntrantsQuality assurance and development of evidence based practiceImplementation of a revised QA assurance process both within service, across Stockport Family and with GM partners.£20kReducing First Time Entrants
Targeted Youth Support & School-Based provisionEnhanced Targeted Youth Support offer to children and young people at risk. A range of interventions to offer targeted interventions, with third sector partners, to provide creativity and flexibility to suit the different learning styles and diverse needs of each individual child.£50KReducing First Time Entrants
Youth Disorder & Anti-Social BehaviourFurther implementation of the Youth Disorder programme at a placed-based and Boroughwide level. Working jointly with the police and other key partners to assess, review and intervene with children and young people identified as causing anti-social behaviour within the authority.50kReducing Reoffending
Reducing First Time Entrants
Reducing Use of CustodySexually Harmful BehaviourAssessment, planning, interventions and delivery of training/consultation/expertise in partnership with the third sector to ensure evidence-based programmes are delivered to young people with sexually harmful behaviour.  Work towards a GM SHB core hub. Roll out of the AIM 3 training model.£30kReducing Reoffending
Reducing First Time Entrants
Reducing Use of CustodyContextual Safeguarding & Local Community networkingStrategic co-ordination and contribution to all elements of Contextual Safeguarding to ensure a wider Community Safety understanding. This will include working with the Missing Hub, Schools and GMP. Additional interventions for children and young people placed in borough from 'Other Local Authorities' who are open to YOS. £50kReducing Reoffending
Reducing First Time Entrants
Complex SafeguardingSeconded YOS SW to work part-time within with Aspire (Complex Safeguarding Team) to champion the needs of young people who offend and are at risk of child sexual exploitation and/or other forms of complex safeguarding.£30KReducing Reoffending
Reducing Use of Custody
Reducing First Time Entrants

Police Custody Strategic and operational focus with partners in GMP to reduce the numbers of young people held overnight in police custody. Includes improving PACE arrangements and maintaining a strategic GM oversight.
Development of the Child-Centred Policing model with GM Appropriate Adult contract and the GM Integrated Health, Liaison and Diversion Partnership.35kReducing First Time Entrants
Develop and implementation of the Arts TrailDelivery of the Arts Trail across Stockport, supported through additional Unitas funding. Delivering arts-based programmes and community-based interventions for children and young people at risk.20kReducing Reoffending
Reducing Use of CustodyGM Children's Services Review. Youth Justice workstreamContribution to the GM Youth Justice Transformation Workstream at a strategic and operational level to scope the commissioning and integration processes across Greater Manchester.£45kOverall Total£362k





2

