 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN  
2019/2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 	 
 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 1 of 20                                  
 
Contents    
Page  
3.......... 
4.......... 
5.......... 
 
6........... 
 
 
7.......... 
 
8........... 
 
9........... 
 
11......... 
 
12......... 
 
13......... 
14........ 
15......... 
16.......... 
17......... 
18......... 
 
19.........  
 
Introduction from the Chair of the YOT Management Board  
Structures & Governance 
-Location  
-YOT Management Board  
 
Strategic Priorities in 2019/2020 
How Will We Measure Success  
Quality Assurance 
 
Strategic Priority 1: Help Young People to Stay Out Of The Criminal Justice System 
 
Strategic Priority 2: Reduce Reoffending When They Do  
 
Strategic Priority 3: Keep Children and Young People Safe   
 
Strategic Priority 4: Keep Other People Safe   
 
Strategic Priority 5: Ensure That Sentence Is Served  
 
Voice of the Young Person  
 
Resources & Value for Money 
-Financial Table  
-Value for Money 
 
Partnership Arrangements 
 
Workforce Development  
 
Risks to Future Delivery Against the Youth Justice Outcome Measures 
 
Chart of YOT & Targeted Support Teams  
 
Glossary  
 
    	 	 	 	 Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 2 of 20                                  
Introduction   

Welcome to the Youth Justice Plan for 2019/2020.   
 
Stockton on Tees Youth Offending Team (YOT) works to help young people to stay out of the criminal justice system and reduce reoffending when they do.  With our partners, we are supporting more young people and their families and at earlier stages.   Recorded youth crime, resulting in a police or court outcome, has reduced by almost a quarter in 5 years (24%) resulting in fewer victims and safer communities.   The number of First Time Entrants has fallen by 29% in the same period. 
 
The work of the YOT is overseen by the YOT Management Board.  As well as challenging and monitoring performance, the Board ensures that learning is taken from research on what works, national guidance, local incidents and local trends to continually improve practice and impact.   
 
Research has been commissioned to explore local reductions in First Time Entrants; the effectiveness of our Out of Court Disposal arrangements; Youth and Group violence; and emerging issues related to Exploitation and Contextual Safeguarding; with learning shared across the partnership.   The Board is currently refreshing its approaches to performance monitoring, including of the new Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System (2019).  The Standards self-assessment work will support us to set a baseline in 2019/2020.  
        
The YOT is located within Early Help functions of Children's Services.  Many of the young people that the YOT works with are amongst the most vulnerable due to their circumstances and are at greater risk of achieving poorer outcomes in life.   
 
In 2019/2020, we will continue to transform how we work with those in the youth justice system by developing longer-term solutions to their behaviours and to strengthen emotional resilience.  The YOT is introducing trauma-informed approaches into its work with children and young people, building upon the learning of YOTs involved in the Enhanced Case Management (ECM) trial.  Alongside this work, we are refreshing our restorative approaches, including face to face mediations, and strengthening our Community Youth Panels, to promote victim and community resilience.       
        
New software enhancements have increased our ability to analyse and understand the YOT cohort, by enabling us to drill into the data contained within individual AssetPlus documents.  Increased capacity here will help to improve decision making around service design, partnership working and commissioning.    
 
I am delighted to be taking the helm of the YOT Management Board at this exciting time to continue improvements for local children and young people, and for local communities.   
 
 
 
 
 
Julie Danks, Chair of Stockton-on-Tees YOT Management Board  
Interim Managing Director, Stockton-on-Tees Borough Council   

Structure & Governance  

Location  
 
The YOT and Targeted Support Services is located within Early Help services.   It comprises youth justice and targeted support services to young people and their families, to reduce crime and other risk-taking behaviours and to reduce the need for specialist social care or crisis services, as part of the 'step up' and 'step down' process.   
 
The service has become fully integrated with staff contributing to a range of outcomes for young people and their families.  The YOT and Targeted Support Manager is line managed by the Early Help Manager.  
 
 
YOT Management Board 
In Stockton on Tees, the YOT Management Board will continue to provide strategic direction and oversight of specific YOT functions and coordinate the provision of local youth justice services.   There is a clear focus on holding those functions, and the wider YOT partnership, to account for performance at both an operational and strategic level.    
 
The membership and the terms of reference of the Management Board have been reviewed and refreshed to ensure its continued effectiveness and compliance with Modern Youth Offending Partnerships.    
 
The main objectives of the Management Board are:  
 
• To ensure the preparation and implementation of the annual Youth Justice Plan; to consider and act upon feedback from the Youth Justice Board (YJB). 
• To determine how the Youth Offending Team is composed and funded, how it is to operate and what functions it is to carry out. 
• To agree measurable objectives linked to key performance indicators as part of the youth justice plan and evaluate service delivery to improve understanding of 'what works' in preventing offending and reoffending, including consideration of thematic inspections. 
• To influence other strategies and programmes from a youth offending perspective. 
• To agree annual funding arrangements and ensure the effective use of resource. In addition to seek opportunities to gain additional resources which complement and add value to core YOT funding. 
• To oversee the appointment and designation of the YOT Manager  
 
Following the retirement of the previous Chief Executive, the new Interim Managing Director of Stockton Borough Council chairs the YOT management board.  Membership is comprised of representatives from the statutory partners: the local authority; clinical commissioning group and public health; police service; probation trust; and from local partners: the courts and the voluntary and community sector.   The Youth Justice Board is also represented.   
 
The Board meets quarterly.  As well as monitoring youth justice outcomes, the Board takes account of emerging trends, policy directives and legislation, research and thematic inspections.  Information on compliance with the conditions of Youth Justice Board grant funding, YOT performance reports, six-monthly quality assurance casework audits and the findings of the National Standards audits are presented and discussed by the Board.    
 
The Board has had some oversight of the youth services transformation, specifically on how it pertains to youth justice services, scrutinised and overseen our transformation process into the reshaped YOT and Targeted Support Service, has reaffirmed its commitment to the achievement of youth justice outcomes and will continue to monitor effectiveness to mitigate risk.   
 
Strong partnership arrangements have been developed with children's social care to protect and safeguard children and young people.  The YOT is represented on the new Safeguarding Children Partnership by the Director of Children's Services, who sits on the YOT Board, and feedback from the partnership is a standing item on the Board's agenda.   
 
YOT and Targeted Support Services will continue to develop working relationships with other early help services and providers.  Much more focus will be placed on restorative approaches within families.   
 
 
Strategic Priorities in 2019/2020:    

1. Help young people to stay out of the criminal justice system  
a) Delivery of effective targeted early help services to young people and their families  b) Restorative approaches  
c) Delivery of effective Out of Court Disposals in partnership with the Police, with learning from the HMI Probation Thematic   
 
2. Reduce reoffending when they do 
a) Assessment and intervention as the foundation of effective service delivery  
b) Engagement of young people and their families as the key to achieving behavioural change 
c) Restorative and desistance approaches  
d) Learning from research and analysis on what works and effective practice   
e) Self-assessment of performance against the new Standards for Children in the Youth Justice System  
f) Strengthen young people's and family emotional wellbeing and resilience 
g) Educational progress and outcomes, including education, training and employment pathways  h) Effective and supported transitions   
 
3. Keep children and young people safe  
a) Safety & wellbeing, including those at risk of exploitation and those in custody  
b) Development of approaches aligned with contextual safeguarding  
c) Partnership approaches  
 
4. Keep other people safe  
a) Effective approaches to manage risk of harm to others 
b) Partnership approaches  
 
5. Ensure that sentence is served  
a) Proactive responses to diversity considerations  
b) Effective engagement and compliance approaches    
 
 
How Will We Measure Success?  

We will record, monitor and report on a set of strategic outcomes, which will form the basis of quarterly performance reports to the YOT Management Board and other partnership groups:  
 
1. The number and rates of first-time entrants 
2. The number and rates of reoffending   
3. The number, rates and duration of young people in custody  
4. Engagement in education, training and employment  
 
Additionally, a new performance framework is under development to enhance our knowledge and understanding of the YOT cohort and our responsivity to strengths and needs.    
 
External scrutiny on performance and quality of youth justice services is delivered by the Youth Justice Board for England and Wales (YJB) and HMI Probation.  The YJB has a network of local partnership advisers who adopt a risk led approach to the monitoring of YOTs.  Stockton on Tees is classified as a 'low risk' partnership  
 
The YOT inspection process will explore how well the organisation is led, managed and set up; alongside the quality of case work practice relating to out of court disposals and court disposals.   The YOT has not been inspected since 2015, so may be likely to be one of the early recipients of the new inspection framework by HMI Probation looking at Quality Standards.   
 
Quality Assurance 

We have developed a quality assurance framework to support effective practice.  We believe that effective case management is a joint responsibility shared by managers and practitioners.  Quality assurance is enhanced by practitioners participating in effective practice workstreams, including peer QA.     
 
All casework is allocated to a named manager to provide consistent oversight and guidance.  This joint approach to case management is underpinned by managers taking a 'step back and a fresh look', being 'curious' and having a degree of 'healthy scepticism'.  It is aimed at maximising learning and development, as well as ensuring that service standards are achieved.   
 
All practitioners receive monthly one to one supervision from their line manager, to deliver case supervision and ensure that the support and developmental needs of team members are identified and that appropriate actions are agreed.  This is complemented by annual staff appraisals.   
 
Monthly quality assurance case file audits are undertaken by managers, with six-monthly reports to the YOT Management Board.   
Strategic Priority 1: Help young people to stay out of the criminal justice system   

Helping young people to stay out of the criminal justice system is high on the corporate agenda.  Early help services have been developed locally over several years, incorporating a range of preventative initiatives and activities.  Delivering effective early help services is a key priority in the Children's Services Strategy and this will be an area of ongoing transformation and improvement over the coming year as provision is reshaped.   
 
Out of Court Disposals, including Triage were introduced in 2013.  These initiatives have had a significant impact on local rates of young people entering the criminal justice system for the first time; YOT data shows a 81% reduction in first-time entrants (FTEs) over 10 years (51 young people in 18/19 compared to 272 in 09/10), with reductions sustained (29% in the last 5 years).  We have undertaken analysis of FTEs in Stockton and benchmarked local findings against a national Ministry of Justice report "An analysis of trends in first time entrants to the youth justice system", 2017.   Learning has also been taken from the HMIP thematic inspection into Out of Court Disposals.   
 
In 2019/2020, we will collaborate alongside our partners, in a national programme, led locally by the Police and Crime Commissioner, to deliver Early Intervention Youth Fund activity to divert children and young people away from crime.       
 
There are more opportunities for the Police and youth justice services to intervene with young people who have committed low impact crimes and divert them from the criminal justice system.    We have refocused many of our resources to this area of work and will continue this approach in the coming year, as well as seeking new opportunities to achieve broader early help outcomes and the delivery of targeted services.  
 
In 2019/2020 we will:  
    
• Harness partnership and commissioned arrangements for early help services to reduce likelihood of offending, including delivery of the Early Intervention Youth Fund programme   
 
• Embed the targeted support offer to young people and their families  
 
• Deliver Triage services to those in the early stages of offending.  Collaborate in a Cleveland wide review of Triage and undertake a thematic review to ascertain if recent improvements have been embedded and are effective       
 
• Deliver enhanced programmes for Out of Court Disposals  
 
• Deliver restorative interventions for victims of youth crime 
 
• Develop restorative approaches to working with families to repair relationships and build skills, support and resilience  
 
• Work to achieve the objectives of the Police & Crime Plan   
 
• Work with our partners in the Liaison & Diversion Project to ensure early access to emotional and mental health and other health services for young people  
 
 
Strategic Priority 2: Reduce reoffending when they do    

Reducing offending is the primary objective for the YOT partnership.  All interventions are designed to promote desistance from crime and we have worked hard to improve our understanding of what works.   Analysis of the YOT cohort has highlighted that young people with the following significant protective factors in their lives are much more likely to desist from crime:    
 
• a sense of belonging to a family and positive /constructive support from at least one parent or carer • positive peer groups  
• engagement with positive leisure activities / community activities  
• positive work ethic and engagement in employment/training or education 
• emotional resilience and wellbeing  
 
We have used this intelligence to shape the services we deliver and our partnership arrangements.  Youth justice interventions are individually tailored to address factors for / against desistance.   Analysis of reoffending data evidences the need for structured and purposeful activities which engage young people, whilst restricting liberty and repairing harm.  It also highlights the need to understand, and respond, to behaviours within the child's overall context; to this end, an Educational Psychologist is available one day a week to provide advice and guidance to YOT practitioners.  
 
We have developed a broad range of intervention programmes, from the educational (First Aid, E-Safety and healthy relationships), generic offending programmes (Making a Change) and specialist cognitive behavioural programmes such as Sticks and Stones for violent offences and Operation U-Turn for dangerous driving.  These have traditionally been delivered in partnership with hospital consultants and the Police.   Our intervention programme offer is currently under review to ensure that we keep up with emerging trends.    
 
The YOT is a member of the Restorative Justice Council and a number of our practitioners are individually accredited as providers and trainers.  A range of restorative activities are delivered, many of which are victim led.   Restorative approaches are evidenced to have a positive impact upon desistance, although this is less marked for those young people with complex and entrenched difficulties.   Specialist restorative justice training has been delivered to YOT staff and key staff in residential children's homes and a joint protocol with Cleveland Police has been refreshed embracing the principles of the national Concordant and restorative approaches to help children in care stay out of the criminal justice system and reduce reoffending when they do.   
 
Overall, youth reoffending rates have decreased significantly in Stockton on Tees.  According to the Police National Computer (PNC), there has been a 73% reduction in the number of reoffences over 5 years (624 reoffences in 11/12, compared with 165 in 16/17) and a similar level of reduction of the number of young people who reoffended (67%, from 160 in 11/12 to 53 in 16/17).  Local data is showing a similar level of reductions.  This will be closely monitored.    
 
Analysis of youth crime evidences that violence, criminal damage, public order and theft/handling were the most common crimes by young people in the previous year, with the peak age for offending being 13-17 years.   It is recognised that there are a small number of young people are responsible for a disproportionate amount of youth crime and we are working hard to engage with this group of young people to reduce their likelihood of reoffending.     
 
There are 5 elements to our approach to reduce reoffending:  
 
1. Strategic planning and partnerships 
2. Quality assessments 
3. Targeting those with medium to high likelihood of reoffending  
4. Delivering imaginative interventions 
5. Effective exit strategies and transitions to other services   
 
The transformation into a YOT and targeted support service has enhanced the services available for young people and their families for the duration of their YOT intervention and beyond.   This has been hugely beneficial.    
 
In 2019/2020 we will:   
  
• Continue to embed our approaches to desistance  
 
• Develop new approaches for those young people who receive targeted and /or other early help services as they end statutory YOT involvement  
 
• Deliver continuous improvements in the range and quality of interventions programmes which are educational, structured and purposeful  
 
• Deliver restorative interventions for victims of youth crime and increase our offer of face to face mediations  
 
• Deliver restorative approaches for children in care  
 
• Introduce new approaches to supporting parents and families, including restorative approaches and Positive Parenting Programmes  
 
• Incorporate learning from local research into our approaches to youth and group violence  
 
• Provide support and high quality training to our community volunteers who support delivery of the Youth Panels for Referral Orders  
 
• Consolidate learning from the analysis of outcome data on reoffending to enhance case management processes and inform service developments  
 
  
Strategic Priority 3: Keep children and young people safe  

We have significant responsibilities to keep children and young people safe.  This can be a result of behaviour and exploitation from other people or resulting from their own behaviour.    
 
Safety and wellbeing considerations are an inherent part of youth justice assessments and all staff are trained in child protection and other safeguarding considerations, including child sexual exploitation, criminal exploitation, drugs and alcohol use and emotional health and wellbeing.  We are exploring contextual safeguarding approaches in partnership with children's social care and early help services.   
 
We adopt safe working practices, including risk assessments of activity programmes and appropriate checks on any commissioned activity.  
 
We have developed our knowledge and understanding of online crimes, in response to a small but growing number of young people being involved in the making and sharing of indecent images and in images of assaults being filmed in public spaces and shared on social media.    
 
Snapshot surveys have highlighted that a large proportion of the YOT cohort have experienced domestic abuse.  Analysis shows a complex picture of multiple types of abuse, with some young people being both on the receiving end of abuse, as well as harming others.  To that end, a Domestic Abuse strategy has been developed and links with specialist providers have been strengthened.  
 
Safety within custody is a key priority for us.  There have been several well publicised events in the national press and youth justice staff are aware of the need to remain vigilant and to act on any concerns they have.     
 
The YOT works hard to appropriately minimise the use of custody.  When custody is used, it generally reflects the seriousness of the offence committed, persistent offending and/or a refusal to engage in community options.  The YOT Management Board regularly scrutinises custody data, monitors support needs and seeks assurance that resettlement plans are in place to both safeguard young people and promote desistance.  During 2018/19, there was 1 custodial remand and 4 custodial sentences imposed, which is the lowest on record.     
 
Our transformation into a YOT and Targeted Support Service will enhance our ability to 'step down' YOT cases into the early help network, ensuring that young people and families continue to receive services to meet their safeguarding needs.     
 
In 2019/2020 we will:  
 
• Comply with Tees Local Safeguarding Children Boards procedures, including child protection  
 
• Ensure regular learning and development for staff  
 
• Make active contributions to the Vulnerable, Exploited, Missing & Trafficked strategy  
 
• Sustain high levels of the Court's confidence in service provision    
 
• Ensure safety and wellbeing as a priority for young people in custody and police detention   
 
• Deliver consistent management oversight and robust quality assurance to ensure that case work relating to safeguarding and protecting meets service standards and the expected standards of HMI Probation  
 
• Explore contextual safeguarding approaches in partnership with children's services.  
 
• Develop new approaches for those young people who receive targeted and /or other early help services as they end statutory YOT involvement  
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Priority 4: Keep other people safe   

Most young people do not present significant risk of harm to the public, to staff and to other professionals.   Nonetheless, managing risk of harm, especially risk of serious harm (RoSH) is a high priority. 
 
We have worked hard to create a culture of robust and consistent risk management practice and improvements in practice have been achieved.  Cases are allocated according to the experience of the worker, with the high-risk cases being reserved for the most experienced staff.  Managers provide enhanced management oversight to those young people who present risk of serious harm.  Intelligence is shared with police.  A monthly risk meeting is held to share information, develop and review the plan for managing risk.   
 
Our staff have received specialist training in a range of subjects, including how to respond to those young people with sexually harmful behaviour and those at risk of radicalisation and violent extremism, in its various forms.  We regularly support the work of other agencies in assessments and risk management plans.  
 
Stockton-on-Tees YOT has a multi-agency approach to managing risk of harm.  Where high risk is identified, we will work in accordance with the Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA).   Local research into youth and group violence was commissioned to develop our practice and to develop multi-agency approaches.  Work remains ongoing to better understanding the relationships and inter-connections between youths / groups in the local area.  We are part of collaborative arrangements, led by the OPCC, to prevent violent and harmful behaviour, as part of the Early Intervention Youth Fund strategy.   
 
We have developed effective transition process in partnership with adult probation services for young people as they become adults.  This is particularly important in ensuring that information and intelligence is not 'lost' during the move from one service to another.  We were supported in this process by a HMI Probation thematic inspection; we received positive feedback about some areas and suggestions for others in which we could improve.  All high-risk cases are transitioned to the National Probation Service (NPS) and we have quarterly meetings to review the transition process and other joint working arrangements.     
 
In 2019/2020 we will:   
 
• Sustain improvements in the quality of Risk of Harm assessments, planning and management.  Ensure that victim safety considerations are incorporated   
 
• Ensure regular learning and development for staff and that the concepts of Risk of Harm / Risk of Serious Harm are fully embedded in practice  
 
• Deliver consistent management oversight and robust quality assurance to ensure that case work as it relates to risk management meets service standards and the expected standards of HMI Probation  
 
• Deliver specific risk reduction policies, including Sexually Harmful Behaviour and Prevent / Channel 
 
• Delivery of the EIYF programme with our partners   
 
• Deliver effective transitions for high risk cases to adult probation services  
 
• Implement MAPPA processes for relevant high-risk cases  

Strategic Priority 5: Ensure sentence is served  
We have worked hard to improve young people's compliance with the requirements of their Out of Court Disposals and court orders.  We recognise that the likelihood of desistance and successful outcomes is increased by good quality engagement with young people and their families.  Numerous research has identified the quality of the relationship between practitioner and young person as a critical success factor.   
 
We also recognise the need to have a balance between effective enforcement which maintains the confidence of the Court and the public, and the specific needs of each young person, their assessed risk and their particular circumstances.  Recent learning from inspections and serious case reviews has highlighted the impact for children living with neglect on things like, attendance for appointments; in response, we have incorporated a 'was not brought' approach into our work.    
 
We have developed practice to enable the young person to have a voice.  We encourage practitioners to 'get to know' the young person and their circumstances.  Family focused work has been improved over several years to better engage parents / carers in the nature and requirements of the planned interventions, the expectations on their behaviour and the anticipated outcomes for all.    
 
Communication can often be a significant barrier to engagement; to that end, we have developed joint working arrangements with Speech, Language and Therapy services where a Therapist is co-located with practitioners, to help us develop better methods to meet individual need.  This has been hugely beneficial to services in improving our verbal communication and written information.     
 
We have spent a lot of time training practitioners in desistance theory in order to ensure that services build upon individual needs, strengths and opportunity.  We recognise that some young people and their families have specific circumstances that can act as barriers to effective engagement, for example, young carers, looked after children, learning needs and disability, language and other potential discriminatory or diversity factors, some of which are protected characteristics under the Equality Act 2010.   Diversity considerations are a key element of our assessments and plans.   
 
In 2019/2020 we will:  
 
• Embed Speech, Language and Communication services for young people and Educational Psychologist consultancy support for practitioners  
 
• Deliver effective engagement and compliance approaches 
• Deliver effective approaches to health and well-being, education, training and employment and other needs  
• Deliver consistent management oversight and quality assurance to ensure that case work relating to engagement and diversity meet service standards and the expected standards of HMI Probation  
 
 
 
Voice of the Young Person  
We are committed to ensuring that young people and their families have a voice; that they have an influence in their individual intervention programmes and in broader approaches to service delivery and developments.   We aspire to deliver motivational, respectful and strength based approaches to promote desistance from crime. 
 
The YOT Management Board commissioned "Your Story Counts", local independent research into young peoples' experiences of the YOT.  The quality of the relationship between the young person and the YOT worker was found to be significant, which reflects national research.  Young people attributed their offending to a combination of factors including "peer pressure", "boredom", as well as problems with their families and difficulties in school.   
 
We have an established service user engagement and consultation strategy and contributes to an annual HMI Probation e-survey of young service users.  Responses are scrutinised to establish what learning can be taken into what works well and what can be improved.     
 
From the perspective of the young people, staff in Stockton on Tees are viewed as helpful.   Many young people describe the value of having practical support and advice; and help with education, training and employment, including basic skills and literacy.  Also cited was support with accommodation, drugs and alcohol and managing their feelings.  "Having someone to talk to" was valued.     
 
Premises are largely viewed as being accessible but some young people do report practical and financial difficulties with transport.  To that end, staff make home visits, reimburse bus fares and use different premises, where available, to help with engagement and compliance considerations.  We also try to ensure that different services and agencies are accessible to young people when they visit our premises.   
 
Some young people are able to reflect on their behaviour and attitudes and make positive changes which benefit them and their communities.  Young people are encouraged to think about the impact of their crime on their victims, their families, themselves and the community:    
 
"I just feel like I want to apologise to the people for what I've done". 
 
We have previously had very positive feedback from HMI Probation about how we engage with and listen to young people.  In the coming year, we will review and refresh our approach.   
Resources & Value for Money  
Funding for the YOT & Targeted Support Service is made up of contributions from partners, the Youth Justice Board, the Police and Crime Commissioner and the use of balances from the YOT pooled budget.   
 
Agency Staffing 
Costs 
 
£ Payments in kind -
Revenue 
£ Other 
Delegated funds  
£ Total 
 
 
£ Local Authority 
 426,673  102,198  
528,871  
 Police Service 
  
 40,127  
 40,127 
 National Probation Service  27,867 5,000 32,867  
Health Services 
  
46,000 48,000  
 
  
94,000 
 Police & Crime Commissioner   82,000 82,000  
YJB Youth Justice Grant 365,777    
  
365,777  
Other * 95,223   
12,000  
107,223  
TOTAL  
933,673      115,994  
201,198  
1,250,865 *  Use of balances from YOT pooled budget    
 
 
The above outlines the total funding to achieve key outcomes relating across youth justice and early help services.  The early help performance framework is currently under development.    
 
Funding from the Youth Justice Board, as with all the statutory YOT partners and the Police and Crime 
Commissioner, will be used exclusively for the delivery of youth justice services and objectives in Stockton on Tees.  Youth justice functions are compliant with the minimum staffing requirements set out in the Crime & Disorder Act 1998, and a structure chart is presented on page 18.  
   
100% of the youth justice grant is allocated to staffing costs within YOT functions, accounting for just under half of the employee costs for practitioners delivering statutory youth justice work in the courts, community and custody; the supervision and management oversight of case managers and other YOT staff, and admin workers who populate the youth justice case management database and extract performance data.  As above, the costs of seconded staff are met by their employing agencies.     
 
Additional funding has been invested by the local authority to create the new and enhanced YOT and Targeted Support Service within Youth Direction.  This has created additional posts to support the expansion and stretch of services to support early help delivery by youth justice and early help practitioners and managers.  Complementing this are other services comprising of prevention and secondary prevention delivery to children, young people and their families and specialist workers, such as an Educational Psychologist and access to specialist neurodevelopmental services.  
   

The YOT and Targeted Support Service has a diverse workforce comprising staff on substantive permanent and temporary contracts, sessional staff on casual contracts and community volunteers.  We also currently have a Social Work student with us on placement.  In addition, there are 3 members of the team who are employed by other agencies and co-located for part of their working week.   
 
Value for Money:  
 
We are committed to delivering services that represent value for money.   A significant amount of time has been spent on understanding the 'value' of services that are delivered, in terms of cost, outcomes and savings created through prevention and 'invest to save' approaches.    
 
We will be delivering a range of services in partnership with others, to avoid duplication and to draw upon the skills and expertise of partners in order to maximise use of resources and expertise.   There will be further consolidation of this over the next 12 months as local services are reshaped to respond to key priorities for children and young people.   
 
 
Partnership Arrangements  

Youth justice services in Stockton on Tees have developed a range of strategic linkages, described below:  
 

  
The range of partners will be further expanded in the coming year as we consolidate arrangements to deliver new youth justice and targeted services to young people and their families.  Some new and exciting partnerships are due to come on board soon, as local services develop. 
 
The majority of youth justice interventions are delivered 'in house' or in partnership with key stakeholders.   
In 2019/2020 the speech, language and communication pilot with North Tees and Hartlepool Foundation Trust will continue.  Joint working arrangements with the Liaison & Diversion Project in partnership with health are expected to continue in order to deliver swift and easy access to health services.   
 
'Emotional resilience' is highlighted in local YOT research as being a significant factor for / against desistance from crime and it is hoped that such projects will help build and strengthen resilience, as well as addressing other risk factors and support needs.   
 
There is close working between YOT and children's social care for those deemed to be a Child In Need, Child in our Care and Care Leavers.  Working protocols are in place and the reduction of criminalisation and offending by children in our care are corporate priorities.   
 
The YOT is a member of the Safer Stockton Partnership.  Multi-agency pathways have been developed to support the "Prevent" duty and YOT and Targeted Services will seek advice and support where extremism related risks have been identified.   
 
The YOT is an integral part of Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA) when a multi-agency approach is required to protect people from serious harm.   
 
Information sharing agreements ensure information is available to support holistic assessments and planning for young people.   All information is managed sensitively in accordance with Data Protection principles.  
 
 
Workforce Development 

Having a skilled and competent workforce is crucial to the delivery of effective services.  Stockton Borough Council is committed to a culture of learning and personal development.    
 
We have developed a robust workforce development strategy, encapsulated in the YOT Training Plan. Mandatory training for practitioners, managers and admin staff has been identified, with timescales for refresher training in a range of areas.  Induction processes have been reviewed and all practitioners now undergo a detailed induction programme, with an incremental workload allocation approach.   
 
The YOT has developed a reflective practice model for practitioners along with an integrated management approach to case management.  This was further supported by the roll out of intensive Effective Practice sessions for staff.  Staff fully engaged in this process and identified their own collective areas for development.  This approach proved to be successful and was valued by staff.   We will continue to embed the learning from these developments during 2019/2020.   
    
Staff can access training from a wide range of sources, including Stockton Borough Council arrangements; Youth Justice Board training; in house training; and from external partners / trainers.  Staff have access to a range of e-learning modules, including in youth justice.    
 
We will continue to identify learning and development needs for individuals and the service via monthly supervisions, annual appraisal, influenced by national and local policy agendas and developments.  In the coming year, staff will be trained in restorative approaches and trauma-informed approaches.  YOT Officers will also receive training in AIM 3 for sexually harmful behaviours.   
 
Risks to Future Delivery against the Youth Justice Outcome Measures 

Reductions in public expenditure are having an impact on all public services.  The YOT Partnership has experienced significant reductions in budget and staffing in recent years.   
 
To an extent, this has been offset by reductions in levels of youth crime locally.   However, as more young people are successfully diverted away from the criminal justice services by early help services, those who remain are increasingly complex and challenging.  We recognise that this may make it potentially more difficult to reduce reoffending at the same rate as in previous years.   
 
Analysis evidences that a small number of young people are responsible for a disproportionate amount of youth crime and we are working hard, with our partners, to engage with this group of young people and deliver effective services.    
 
The local authority has embarked upon a service transformation programme and a new Children's Services Strategy 2017-2020 was previously launched, with a clear ambition for innovative and joined-up early help services.   We are alert to the risks inherent in change programmes, namely that attention can become focused on establishing and embedding new services.  We have worked hard to minimise this, with ongoing scrutiny and oversight by the YOT Management Board to mitigate the risks to youth justice outcomes.   
 
In the previous years, there has been some disruption to performance management processes.  This is now becoming resolved and work is ongoing to refresh and improve our Performance Management framework.    
   
The Management Board is proactive in trying to mitigate risks and create opportunities at both a strategic and operational level to ensure that youth justice outcomes measures are achieved.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  YOT & Targeted Support Teams - as of 31st May 2018  Showing actual team and line management arrangements (temporary) 
 
 
 
 	 
 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 18 of 20                                                                                             

 
 
Glossary  
AssetPlus  	A strengths based structured assessment tool based on research and developed by the Youth Justice Board looking at the child or young person's offence, personal circumstances and factors affecting desistance from crime  
 
Careworks  	The YOT information database  
 
Contextual 	Safeguarding activity which focuses 'beyond their home and families', for Safeguarding  	example, the child's time / influences when in schools, with friends, out in the 
 	community    
 	 
Criminal Justice 	Involves any or all of the agencies involved in upholding and implementing the System  	law: police, courts, Youth Offending teams, probation and custody providers.   
 
Desistance from 	The process of abstaining from crime over a period of time; encouraged by a crime 	strengths-based work model which helps them explore and develop their  	abilities, interests and personal goals  
  
ETE 	Education, training and employment; work to improve educational and learning outcomes  
 
FTE 	First-time entrants to the criminal justice system  
 
HMIP 	HM Inspectorate of Probation  
 
Keeping Others 	Actions taken to keep to a minimum the individual child or young person's 
Safe   	opportunity to behave in a way that presents risk of harm to others, to promote the physical, psychological and financial safety of the public  
 
Restorative 	Enable those who have been harmed to convey the impact of the harm to those Approaches  	responsible and for those responsible to acknowledge this impact and take  	steps to put it right.  Often include restorative conversations.  Designed to heal 
conflict in relationships   
 
Restorative 	The use of restorative approaches within a criminal justice context.  Brings Justice  	those harmed by crime (victims) and those responsible for the harm (the  	offender) into communication, with a view to repairing the harm caused  
 
Safety & 	Terminology introduced by the YJB / AssetPlus to describe potential adverse 
Wellbeing  	outcomes where concerns exist that the young person's safety and well-being may be compromised through their own behaviour, personal circumstances or because of the acts / omissions of others 
 
Safeguarding  	Action taken to promote the welfare of children and protect them from harm 
 
 
 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 19 of 20                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For more information on this Plan, please contact Stockton- on-Tees YOT & Targeted Support 
 
Services.   
 
 
 
Tel: 01642 527597                                               Email: youthoffendingservice@stockton.gov.uk 
 
  
 
 
https://www.stockton.gov.uk/children-and-young-people/youth-direction/youth-offending-team/ 
 
 
 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 20 of 20                                    
This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 



 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 3 of 20                                     

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 



This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 3 of 20                                     

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 3 of 20                                     

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 3 of 20                                     

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 12 of 20                                    

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 12 of 20                                    

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 12 of 20                                    

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 12 of 20                                    

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 12 of 20                                    

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

 
 	  	 	 	 	 
Stockton-on-Tees Youth Justice Plan 2019/2020                                                                                              Page 12 of 20                                    

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 





This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 
 



This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 

This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 





This document was classified as: OFFICIAL 



