

Contents: 
1 Introduction...............................................................................................................................  Page 2 
 2 Structure and Governance....................................................................................................... Page 10 3 Resources and Value for Money............................................................................................. Page 12 4 Partnership Arrangements...................................................................................................... Page 14 5 Risks to Future Delivery Against the Youth Justice Outcome Measures........................... Page 16 6 Service Priorities....................................................................................................................... Page 19 7 Youth Justice Action Plan......................................................................................................... Page 21 8 Signatories.................................................................................................................................. Page 23  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION: 
1. Legal Framework 
Local Authorities have a statutory duty to submit an annual youth justice plan relating to their provision of youth justice services. 
Section 40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 sets out the youth offending partnership's responsibilities in producing a plan. It states that it is the duty of each local authority, after consultation with the partner agencies, to formulate and implement an annual youth justice plan, setting out; 
* How youth justice services in their area are to be provided and funded  
* How the youth offending team will be composed and funded, how it will operate, and what functions it will carry out. 
 
 
2. Development of the Youth Justice Plan 
This Youth Justice Plan has been developed with reference to the guidance; Modern Youth Offending Service Partnerships. In order to inform this plan the YOS Service Improvement Group, Leadership Team and Management Board have had regular sight of data including progress against the 3 statutory targets of Reducing First Time Entrants, Reducing Reoffending and Minimising the Use of Custody. However, the feedback and performance data is not limited to these three elements and over the last 12 months the Management Board have received performance data around children's feedback, standards of assessments, voice of the child and education, training and employment. 
In addition, this youth justice plan aims to ensure that the needs of children within Stoke on Trent are addressed through a full and comprehensive understanding of the cohort as presented in the YOS annual report. This has provided the YOS and its partners with detailed knowledge around the cohort of children with whom we work and a greater understanding of the changing needs of those children. 
Stoke on Trent and Staffordshire Youth Offending Services have also completed a strategic and operation review of the services including feedback from volunteers, staff, partnership organisations and members of the Management Board.  This review made a number of recommendations which were accepted by the Management Board and therefore the review has also formed a platform for the aims specified within this annual plan. 
It is also recognised that the preventing and reducing offending also requires a larger partnership response and as such the annual justice plan shares a number of aims with other plans. This includes the Children's Safeguarding Board which, under the new arrangements have now amalgamated. The YOS has always worked closely with the Safeguarding Board and will continue to do so under the new arrangements.  
This annual plan has also been developed with reference to the Staffordshire Strategic Framework for Reducing Offending: 2018-21 which provides an oversight of all offender management activity across Stoke on Trent and Staffordshire. 
3. Progress Against Youth Justice Plan 2018-19 
The Stoke on Trent Youth Justice Plan 2018- 19 specified how the Youth Offending Service would achieve its key performance targets of; 
* Reducing First Time Entrants  
* Reducing Re-offending 
* Reducing the use of custody 
Progress has been made in all areas, but a number of these areas require further development. There have also been new and emerging trends evident from the data which the current plan will focus on addressing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducing First Time Entrants 
The latest national figures show that the first-time entrant rate within Stoke on Trent is 295 (October 2017- September 2018). This is a significant decrease from 481 which was the local rate for the previous year (-38%). However, this remains above the national and family YOT average. Also of concern is that data taken from the local recording system indicates that there has been a recent increase in the levels of FTES entering the Criminal Justice System over the last quarter. Therefore, whilst the stated target specified in the Youth Justice Plan 2018-19 was achieved, it has not been sustained. 
 
 

In recognition that the rate of FTEs has remained above the national average the Management Board requested that a short analysis of Referral Orders that were FTEs was completed. This was presented to the YOS Management Board and found that the majority of children who received a Referral Order as their first disposal did so due to the nature of their offence or because they had failed to make a full admission to the Police. Discussions have taken place with partners and actions around simple information for children arrested and the role of appropriate adult are being enhanced. It is hoped that when this is rolled out it may have some impact.  
The Service Improvement Group has requested that an evaluation of those children who receive a Community Resolution and re-offend be completed. This will be combined with analysis of those children who become first time entrants following a previous intervention by the YOS. It is anticipated that this will identify any gaps in practice. 
Stoke on Trent Youth Offending Service, along with Staffordshire Youth Offending Service, have had their prevention services reviewed as part of a commissioned review by Cordis Bright. The report asserted that the service offered was viewed positively by practitioners, other professionals and the children themselves. However, it also made recommendations around how the services could be improved. It is hoped that, moving forward, there will be a more effective prevention service with greater scrutiny and challenge. This will be monitored by a multiagency Prevention Board which will offer oversight of the Prevention element of the Service and report into the YOS Management Board.  This should have a positive impact on the rate of first-time entrants. 
The Youth Offending Service has also worked with partners to continue the work to reduce the criminalisation of looked after children and a joint protocol for reducing the criminalisation of Looked After Children has been developed. Work is now ongoing to ensure that this protocol is compliant with the National Protocol released in 2018. 
The Youth Offending Service recognises that, in order to further reduce the rate of first-time entrants, it must work in conjunction with partners including schools, early intervention services and voluntary and community services. The YOS will focus on utilising and shaping the services which are there to support children prior to them becoming first time entrants. 
 
 
 
Reducing Reoffending 
The rate of reoffending within Stoke on Trent has reduced, according to national data. The most recent three-month cohort (Jan- Mar 2017) showed a rate of 27%. The aggregated quarterly data (April 16- Mar 17) gave a rate of 37.3 % which is below the national and YOT family average.  

 
 
In 2018 the Management Board were presented with an analysis of those children who had reoffended, as identified by the local reoffending tracker. It found that 38% of reoffenders were looked after or in supported accommodation. Only 2 of the cohort had not experienced significant trauma and a significant number of children had grown up in a household where domestic violence was prevalent. The majority of children had also experienced multiple address moves and school placements. In addition to this analysis, the service received an input from a young care leaver who explained to practitioners the impact that consistent movement of placements can have on a child, on top of a background of trauma. He also discussed the importance of language and hearing the child's voice in decision making. 
The YOS has continued to move forward with the Adverse Childhood Experiences lines of enquiry work, which will be evaluated by Staffordshire University. The work that the YOS is completing around ACEs has been presented to senior Police colleagues. The Leadership team have received training on becoming trauma informed and, in the coming year, the YOS will receive further training and embed the trauma informed work. Given the presence of Adverse Childhood Experiences in the lives of the majority of children who reoffended it is anticipated that as the YOS develops its trauma informed practice this will have a positive impact upon the reoffending rate. 
The YOS annual report highlighted that 75% of school age young people had some kind of specialist support above and beyond an educational placement. The Management Board have also received quarterly updates regarding the number of school age children whose attendance was below 85% along with any post 16 children who are identified as not in education and employment. The Management Board recognises that the levels of YOS children not attending full time education is lower than it would like, given that evidence suggest those children who achieve and feel connected to school are less likely to offend/ re-offend. Given the importance of this area the YOS will develop an Education, Training and Employment strategy and action plan which will for an important part of this year's work. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reducing the Use of Custody 
The latest national data shows that the rate of custodial sentences is 0.18 (Jan - Dec 2018). This is a reduction from the previous period (Jan - Dec 2017) and is well below the national and YOT family average. Having reviewed the custodial sentences it also appears that children who have been sentenced to custody are much more likely to receive a further custodial sentence, with a number of custodial sentences being given to the same child. Stoke on Trent has contributed to the thematic inspection on children serving custodial sentences and their rehabilitation. Therefore, the recommendations made in this report, which is due to be published in September, will be particularly relevant to this service. Therefore, the YOS needs to examine its resettlement programmes to ensure that these children have access to all of the resources necessary. The YOS will utilise the HMIP thematic report on resettlement along with the Beyond Youth Custody work completed in order to further develop its resettlement process. 

 
Improving Practice 
The YOS is committed to improving practice and has worked to improve communication with staff, volunteers, children and their families. The YOS has introduced breakfast briefings in order to convey various areas of best practice, new initiatives and the work of partnership organisations to practitioners. A Service Improvement Group has also been established which examines performance data, feedback from children and areas of good practice.  
Feedback from children has been very positive with 83% of children being asked for their views, 91% of children stating that the intervention was useful and that things were ok or had "got better" in areas of their lives. Over the coming year the YOS will focus on ensuring that feedback from children is maximised and will include feedback from parents wherever appropriate. A number of suggestions have been made by the Service Improvement Group on how to improve feedback from children and families and these will be explored. 
In order to continually improve quality, the leadership team has conducted a number of audits, including how present the voice of the child is in case records. The Management Board Chair completed this audit with other managers. The feedback from these audits has also contributed to the youth justice plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE: 
Stoke Youth Offending Service is governed by the YOS Management Board. There has been a change of chair in the last 12 months, as our previous chair left the Local Authority. The chair of the Management Board is currently the interim Assistant Director of Children's Services. The Board has good attendance from statutory partners, but is also well attended by our wider partnership including; Werrington YOI, Chair of the Youth Court Bench, Staffordshire Commissioner's Office, Elected Member, Education and Reducing Re-offending Partnership (CRC). 
Members of the Board will take a lead on each highlighted area within the plan.  
What the Board does to ensure effective governance: 
• Supports the Youth Offending Service in achieving its principal aim of preventing and reducing re-offending amongst children and young people 
• Ensures the effective delivery of youth justice services via monitoring and implementation of the annual youth justice plan and post inspection plans 
• Monitors Youth Offending Service performance against National Indicators by scrutinising quarterly performance reports and agreeing actions for improvement 
• Scrutinises the Youth Offending Service annual spending to ensure that all core services are delivered within the allocated budget 
• Ensures that the Youth Offending Service is fully integrated into and able to influence strategic developments in which partners are engaged 
 
The Management Board will continue to meet quarterly and each meeting will receive the performance report in order to understand progress around key indicators and hold the YOS and the partnership to account. In addition, each meeting will be themed whereby a deeper analysis will be developed, with key partners, to offer a greater understanding of that area. The Management Board will also receive quarterly financial reports to ensure that the combined YOS budget is being used effectively.  
The Management Board are aware of the new Youth Justice Standards and the work that will be required by the YOS and the Management Board to complete the first of a series of self-assessments which will measure the YOS against the new standards. Following the completion of the self-assessment the Management Board will oversee any actions required to improve performance and will monitor progress made.  
The Leadership Team and Service Improvement Group will meet in advance of the Management Board and will also be responsible for examining performance data and raising any barriers or areas of good practice to the Management Board. This includes feedback from children and will incorporate feedback from families. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY: 
Stoke on Trent is well supported by its partners. Staffordshire Police Service provide; 2 seconded Police Officers along with a Victim Liaison Officer, who supports the delivery of the out of court disposal process. The joint YOS review, which was recently completed, recommended that the role of the Police Officers across Staffordshire and Stoke be reviewed to ensure that best use is made of this valuable resource. Using the guide, Role of the YOT Police Officer, the YOS Leads will meet with the Police Service Board Member to ensure that this takes place. 
All children who are referred into triage or who receive a sentence from the Court are assessed by the health team based within the YOS. The health team consists of; 0.4 Registered Mental Health Nurse, 0.5 Children's Nurse and 0.2 Speech and Language Therapist. At present, the SLT is working 4 days per week across Staffordshire and Stoke due to funding from the Transforming Mental Health and Youth Justice bid. 
The Youth Offending Service has a full time Probation Officer seconded from the National Probation Service. This was increased from a halftime post to a full-time post under the recent National Probation Service/ Ministry of Justice review. The YOS review identified the value of this provision and again, recommendations were made to further improve this provision through a review of the Probation Officers role and the transitions process.  
Stoke on Trent Careers Service also contributes 0.8 careers advisor to support post 16 children into education, training and employment. This is an invaluable resource which is utilised widely by those children open to YOS and will be instrumental in achieving the aims set out in the education, training and employment strategy and plan. 
 
 
 
 
In addition to the above staff the Youth Offending Service also receives the following financial contributions; 
Partner Contributions Direct Payments Staffing Total Stoke-on-Trent City Council £561,587 £25,355 £586,942 Staffordshire Police / PCC £204,058 £114,560 £318,618 Health   £25,000 £130,633 £155,633 Probation      £5,000 £31,708 £36,708 Youth Justice Board £507,020  £507,020 TOTAL £1,313,485 £302,256 £1,604,921  
There is a clear commitment to the work of the YOS as is demonstrated by the financial and in-kind contributions from our partners and their commitment, through attendance at the YOS Management Board, to the aims and objectives of the Youth Offending Service within Stoke on Trent. 
 
 
 
 
PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS: 
Stoke Youth Offending Service sits within the Children, Families and Early Intervention Directorate. The YOS Lead is line managed by the Early 
Intervention Strategic Manager. The YOS previously sat within specialist services but moved directorate in 2018 as it was considered that the YOS had a more natural fit within early intervention services. This has been a positive move for the YOS and over the coming year the YOS will become more integrated into early intervention services whilst maintaining its speciality within youth justice. It is anticipated that the expertise of early intervention services will augment the work of the YOS, particularly around family work including parents and siblings.  
The Local Authority has recently strengthened its offer around housing and anti-social behaviour through the establishment of the communities' service. A number of representatives from Stoke on Trent Youth Offending Service has met with the Anti-Social Behaviour Officers and their manager in order to ensure that interventions are taking place in a timely manner and offering the required support to prevent such behaviour escalating. Over the coming year a more robust procedure will be put in place to ensure that those children requiring an invention from YOS are identified and referred. This would create significant savings for the partnership. 
The YOS also has strong links with Children's Services and currently employs 1.5 Social Workers and a Risk and Safeguarding Co-ordinator. A number of the children YOS work with have identified welfare and safeguarding needs. YOS case managers attend multi-agency meetings regarding looked after and children in need. However, Stoke on Trent YOS has not always involved children's services in contributing to plans and risk/ vulnerability management. The recently revised Management of Risk Policy makes explicit the requirement for case managers to invite Social Workers and other relevant professionals to the Management of Risk Forum and recent training has focussed on producing "one plan" for any child so as not to duplicate or contradict areas of work.  
The Youth Offending Service manages children who are at risk or who pose a risk to others through the risk management procedure, which includes the operation of the risk management forum. The YOS has excellent relationships with the MAPPA team. The YOS Lead is a member of the strategic management board and there is good attendance from YOS staff at MAPPA training events. A MAPPA coordinator attends the YOS when MAPPA level 1 children are discussed and this has been a productive and supportive relationship.  
The Youth Offending Service has a close relationship with the NSPCC, who deliver the intervention for victims of, and those who display, problematic and harmful sexual behaviour and this has been further enhanced by the transforming mental health and youth justice project. 
The YOS has taken a leading role in supporting the completion of the multi-agency NSPCC HSB audit and is now working with a range of partners to support the action plan. This aims to ensure that children who display problematic or harmful sexual behaviour receive the appropriate service in a timely manner and that these interventions are evidence based and designed to reduce the repetition of such behaviour.  
Stoke on Trent has a local Youth Offender Institute, Werrington. A representative from Werrington attends the YOS Management Board and is engaged in other Boards within the County and City. The YOS is committed to further enhancing its relationship with the YOI in particular to ensure that learning is shared around safeguarding children within custody. The YOS will also work with Werrington to ensure that the recommendations from the Thematic inspection report around children in custody are implemented and the 2 services are in a positive position to complete this together. 
 
The YOS is also working closely with its partners to further enhance and strengthen their response to child criminal exploitation and has supported training delivered by the Stoke on Trent Safeguarding Children Board. The YOS Lead is also engaged in the Child Exploitation task group which is working to develop a single child exploitation strategy and develop appropriate pathways for children identified as at risk of exploitation. This work will be overseen by the Stoke and Staffordshire Safeguarding Children Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY AGAINST THE YOUTH JUSTICE OUTCOME MEASURES: 
 
Stoke Youth Offending Service has taken part in the resettlement thematic inspection. The YOS will examine the findings of this inspection and incorporate them into the action plan. Although the level of custodial sentences is small within Stoke on Trent, it is concerning that when released from custody the likelihood of a recall on license or further custodial sentence for further offending is high. Whilst this is reflective of national data it remains a risk area for Stoke YOS.  
As previously stated, the rate of first-time entrants appears to have ended its decline (based on local data). This is identified as one of the major risk factors for Stoke on Trent Youth Offending Service. Whilst the introduction of the "triage" process has had some impact it has not been sufficient in reducing the level of FTEs to the national or YOT family average. Further analysis is required to understand this trend and this risk must be addressed through improved prevention services and better delivery of community resolutions including a timely intervention and successful exit planning. 
There has been significant national attention on knife related offences recently and this has included new legislation. As can be seen from the below table, between 2017 and 2018 knife related offences and drugs offences were the only 2 types of offences which increased in number. Violence, Criminal Damage and Theft all reduced in number. It is not clear what the driver behind this increase is, whether schools and Police are becoming more aware of the issue or whether it is truly becoming a greater threat. However, the majority of children charged with possession of offensive weapon do not commit an offence with that weapon and state that they are carrying it because they feel unsafe. It is therefore important that a message goes out to children that the carrying of weapons is not normalised.  

 
The picture regarding child criminal exploitation, gang association and knife related offenses appears complex within Stoke on Trent. Whilst the numbers of children receiving convictions for violence has actually reduced (according to the YOS annual report) there is concern that rival groups of children are becoming involved in altercations and schools have raised concerns around this issue. This appears to be aggravated by social media in some instances. The potential threat of serious youth violence, whilst not as evident as in other areas of the country, remains of concern. As a result, the YOS is working closely with partners, including Staffordshire Youth Offending Service, Stoke on Trent Children's and Families Services, Staffordshire Local Authority, Staffordshire Commissioner's Office, Catch 22 and Staffordshire Police to develop a Child Exploitation Strategy which will seek to identify and support those children who are at risk.  

In addition, the Youth Offending Service supported the preparation of a bid for the troubled families; reducing youth crime funding and was successful in receiving £226,000. This funding will be utilised to support 2 areas of the city where data has shown the greatest risk is present. The work is supported by the Youth Offending Service as part of the prevention agenda along with using the opportunity to further develop the YOSs relationship with the community and voluntary sector. 
The YOS has completed work using the YJB disproportionality toolkit. This showed that White British male children were over-represented within the criminal justice system within Stoke on Trent. However, this tool examined the whole of the YOS population and therefore it is considered that further analysis of prevention and statutory should be explored. There is also concern that there has been a slow increase in Looked After Children open to the Youth Offending Service. In 2017 the YOS worked with partners to relaunch the reduction of criminalisation of looked after children. The partnership has agreed to meet to examine that the local protocol conforms to best practice advocated in the national protocol and also to ensure that everything required by the partnership is being achieved. 
Through performance data provided to the Leadership Team and Management Board regarding children attending education, training and employment there have been clear concerns given the level of poor education attendance amongst children open to the Youth Offending Service. Given the importance of, and evidence base for, the relationship between educational attendance and achievement and reduction in offending behaviour a separate education, training and employment plan has been developed to address this area. This will continue to be monitored by the Leadership Team and Management Board but will provide greater insight into the needs and barriers of those children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SERVICE PRIORITIES: 
 
Strengthening Governance and Leadership 
The Joint Staffordshire and Stoke on Trent Youth Offending Service Review highlighted the importance of the partnership and the 
Management Board's role in promoting and supporting the work of the YOS. In order to further enhance governance and leadership that is provided, the Board will review the Terms of Reference and attendees. The Performance Report will also be reviewed to ensure it provides the information necessary for the Board to monitor the progress of the YOS and ensure that Youth Justice Services are being delivered appropriately. In addition, the Board will hold a joint meeting with Staffordshire Youth Offending Service Board annually in order to align any priorities as appropriate. 
Reducing First Time Entrants 
As identified previously, this area of performance will require some significant attention in order to achieve a reduction. It is evident that a greater understanding of the FTE cohort is required and this will be presented to the Management Board. It is anticipated that the strengthening of governance and clarity of the YOS prevention service should contribute to a reduction in FTEs and will be closely monitored by the establishment of a YOS prevention board. It has also been highlighted by the Service Improvement Group that the robust delivery of Community Resolutions interventions along with clear exit strategies and strong links to community and voluntary provision should result in fewer children entering the youth justice system. 
 
 
 
 
Reducing the Rate of Reoffending 
Whilst Stoke on Trent Youth Offending Service has made positive progress in this area there remains a small cohort of children who reoffend. From previous analysis it is evident that those children who reoffend are predominantly children who have experienced trauma. Thus the YOS will continue its work on developing and embedding trauma informed practice and will work with partners to increase their understanding of the relationship between adverse childhood experiences and offending. The work that YOS are supporting around child exploitation and the associated pathways should also contribute this area. In addition, the mentor pilot will be evaluated and the findings shared with the Service Improvement Group, Leadership Team and the Management Board. The YOS and Police are committed to establishing a forum where emerging patterns and trends can be discussed to support children and communities in addressing this behaviour. The Lead for YOS will also review the current health pathways, including speech, language and communication to ensure that these are meeting the needs of those complex children who are most likely to reoffend. The transition process between the Youth Offending Service and the National Probation Service and Community Rehabilitation Company is well established but the transition protocol will be reviewed and will detail the oversight of the Management Board along with the inclusion of other services such as leaving care and mental health. 
Reducing the Unnecessary Use of Custody 
Given the number of children receiving multiple custodial sentences it is important that Stoke Youth Offending Service improves its resettlement work. The Youth Offending Service will utilise the thematic report in order to improve the outcomes for children who are resettling in the community. The YOS are also committed to working with its local Youth Offending Institution, Werrington, to improve the experiences of children in custody. This will also rely on working with children's services and families of those sentenced to custody and ensuring that they have access to education on release. 
Education, Training and Employment 
There is a recently developed Education, Training and Employment YOS plan which outlines the work that the Youth offending Service and wider partnership will complete in order to improve children's attendance at and access to education. This will be implemented though all stages of YOS intervention from prevention services to resettlement from custody. As such the successful implementation of the plan should have appositive impact on reducing first time entrants, reducing reoffending and reducing the use if custody. 


 exploration strategy and pathways criminally exploited Ensure that all transition services are aligned to reduce risk of 18 year olds 
reoffending  Reduction in transition cases committing further offences.  Develop further engagement with community and voluntary organisations  Increase in numbers of children engaging with positive/ community activities at end of order.  Reducing the 
Unnecessary Use of 
Custody Implement the recommendations of the thematic inspection report  Reduced number of children receiving multiple custodial sentences  Develop joint plan of work with Werrington YOI  Reduced number of children receiving multiple custodial sentences  Increase numbers of children accessing 
education, training or employment Implement ETE strategy  Numbers of children in attendance in ETE increases.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

Signatories Philip Segurola (YOS Management Board Chair) Interim Assistant Director for Early Intervention and Children's Social Care - Stoke-on-Trent City Council  Rachel Dodd 
 
 Strategic Manager Early Intervention Services- Stoke on Trent City Council  Joy Molloy Lead of Stoke on Trent Youth Offending Services 
 
  DCI Rebecca Hyde Staffordshire Police 
 
  Phil Bromley Senior Probation Officer - HM Prison and 
Probation Service 
  Amanda Locke Senior Strategic Lead - Commissioning - 
Staffordshire CCG 
  Peter Scott Police and Crime Commissioners Office 
 
  Shyamali Fenton HM Courts and Tribunals Judiciary 
 
  Councillor Randolph Conteh Councillor Elected Ward Member - Housing, 
Communities and Safer City 
  Wayne George HMIP Werrington 
  Nicola Holmes Deputy Head of Staffordshire, Stoke on Trent and 
Solihull - CRC 
  
 






2 
 

1 
 











 
12 
 

 
12 
 




2 
 







2 
 

2 
 




2 
 







2 
 

2 
 




2 
 







2 
 

2 
 




2 
 

