   together for children
SUNDERLAND YOUTH OFFENDING SERVICE
YOUTH JUSTICE PLAN 2018-20

CONTENTS
Page
FOREWORD
STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCERESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY
2018/19 Budget
• Delivery of Youth Justice in 2018/19
Workforce and Specialist ResourcesPARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTSRISKSYOS PARTNERSHIP BOARD APPROVAL


Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20FOREWORDWe have worked hard as partners this year to continue to drive improved outcomes for our children and young people who are vulnerable to offending. We know that we are operating in a landscape of continuous change and that our interventions and services have to respond accordingly. This year's plan contains the core messages that we feel firmly committed to - that is that prevention and early intervention works, that coaching young people through restorative interventions works, and that working together as partners to reduce offending and re-offending, still works.
We know the Charlie Taylor review holds more opportunity for Government to lead reform and innovation and as a high performing YOS we are ready to embrace those opportunities. In the meantime we will continue to work hard to maintain strong core service delivery for all of our young people and families in Sunderland.
JILL COLBERT
Director for Children's Services & Chief Executive, Together for Children Sunderland
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20INTRODUCTIONSunderland Youth Offending Service (YOS) is a multi-agency service comprising of the four statutory agencies of Police, Probation, Health, the Local Authority and Together for Children. The service works in partnership with other key agencies such as the area courts and specialist service providers including child mental health, substance misuse and accommodation.
The role and responsibilities of local Youth Offending Teams/Services
(YOT/YOS) was set down by the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. It also included the requirement for each local area to produce an annual Youth Justice Plan setting out how youth justice services will be delivered in the local area.
The principal aim of the service is to prevent offending and re-offending by children and young people. In doing so, the service works in partnership to deliver both statutory and non-statutory services to:
• Young people aged 10-1 7 who, because of actual offending have become involved in the criminal justice system;
• Children and young people identified as at risk of offending;
• Families of children and young people offending or at risk of offending; and
• Victims of young people who have offended.
Strategic Priorities
Sunderland YOS has retained 4 strategic priorities from those initially established in the service's 3 year strategy in 2013/14 to ensure that the service was able to effectively respond to local and national priorities in relation to youth justice and wider key strategic agendas:
Priority 1 - A preventative approach to reducing reoffending
Priority 2 - Reducing Reoffending
Priority 3 - A Restorative Justice Approach
Priority 4 - Service Evaluation
ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE YOS IN 2018/19 AND INNOVATION FOR 2019/20
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20
Performance against National Indicators
First time entrants (FTE)
Police National Computer (PNC) data for 2018/19 shows the FTE rate per 1001000 of young people entering the criminal justice to be 333 which equates to 77 young people. The FTE rate in Sunderland has therefore continued to decrease but remains worse than the national rate which has improved at a faster rate.
Reoffending
The latest PNC data between April 201 6 and June 201 6 reports the reoffending binary rate in Sunderland at 31 .1% which is better than Regional (43.5%) and National Rates (41.4%). This is showing progress; however this indicator will be a focus for sustained improvement within the year ahead and to concentrate efforts on the frequency of young people reoffending; which remains a challenge.
Custody
There were no custodial disposals during the year 2018-1 9. Sunderland has a very low use of custody
LAC Offending
The latest available provisional information for 201 8/19 at the time of preparing this report on offending rates of children looked after was 6.2% which is a slight deterioration from the previous year which was 5.1 % but remains an improvement compared to 8.1% in 2016/17. This performance is also likely to be closely in line with anticipated national rates.
Performance Against Our Service Development Priorities of 2018/19
In 2018 -20, the youth justice plan set out four key areas of targeted service development. These were:
1 - A preventative approach to reducing offending
2 - Reducing Reoffending
3 - A restorative justice approach
4 - Work to reduce NEET
Updates are provided below on the progress and the innovative practice being delivered to achieve progress against our national indicators.
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20
1 - A preventative approach to reducing offending
• In 201 7/18 the Wear Kids Prevention Team returned to the YOS and the case managers in the Team have been trained to use the Asset assessment model. Building Wear Kids back into the YOS model in the last year has enabled us to refine how we target young people committing antisocial behaviour (ASB) and therefore at risk of offending. Joint work with the ASB team as well as with the wider Early Help resources has enabled the YOS to offer a voluntary programme to young people with identified risk factors (Wear Kids screening tool) under the age of 13. Across 2018/1 53% of Wear Kids interventions were completed successfully. The remaining interventions were either no longer appropriate or refusals to receive this voluntary intervention.
• The Liaison and Diversion (L&D) has from the 1 st April 201 9 been delivered by NTW. It is too early to report on the outcomes for young people but the provider has agreed to give an update to the Board in the autumn on how the scheme is working
• A pilot project run in partnership with Nexus (Transport operator) offering intervention for young people subject to fines for fare evasion has avoided young people being taken to court for such offences. Nexus are currently evaluating the impact of this. This project has significantly improved partnership working arrangements with both Nexus and also British Transport Police, enabling the YOS to identify any unmet need and sign post on to other agencies as relevant. Within this model, the YOS stay involved as required to ensure ongoing referrals are picked up. Nexus provided anecdotal evidence that Nexus young people who have engaged with the YOS have not gone to offend.
• A development session with YOS Board members and staff identified that working with young people not in school was a top priority for the service to minimise the risk for them to become involved in offending.
• The YOS Triage practice model has been re-modelled to ensure that there is a more robust approach taken to the assessment and planning of interventions and to ensure that case managers are effectively identifying how to engage YOUng people and parents/carers, identify unmet need and make relevant referrals Further development of out of court disposals continues to be a focus and it is hoped we can move to adopting an Out of Court Disposal model in partnership with Northumbria Police to ensure all young people received an appropriate disposal informed by assessment undertaken by the YOS. This WOUld require RJ intervention in all cases as well as identifying unmet need, without the use of Youth Cautions, which COUld reduce number of FTEs further.
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20• The LAC protocol continues to drive reductions in offending for children who are looked after in our children's homes. Through the protocol, a culture of diversion is now embedded in the four homes. This approach is continuing to be developed further with plans to design and deliver a pilot with schools for low level offending committed on school premises to divert school children out of the criminal justice system.
• Partnership arrangements with the Antisocial Behaviour Team is enabling an improved joined up service to young people and their families/carers where ABAs are being considered or delivered.
• Plan to address FTES over the last three years has shown a consistent positive impact UPOn this indicator; however need to work to continue this in line with Out of Court Disposals Thematic.
2 - Reducing Reoffending
• In relation to Integrated Offender Management IOM, practice has been improving between the YOS and Police in relation to identifying and providing joined up working for young people being assessed as high likelihood of offending, including consultation over criminal behaviour orders (CBOs).
• Probation transitions from the YOS has been strengthened through the embedding of the role of the seconded probation officer in line with national guidance to effectively support the move on to probation from the YOS for 1 7 year olds.
• We are delivering improved practice at court around bail and remand with all case managers in the YOS now involved in this area of work. This is achieving consistency of practice and early triggers to social care for any young people at risk of remand.
• Our Referral Order Panel approach has been strengthened in year with both additional volunteers and a revised approach to support and review of practice. We have SUCCeSSfUIly recruited an additional 7 volunteers, all of whom have been fully trained in the year. We are using existing volunteers to offer peer support and shadowing opportunities to build their confidence and skills. In addition, all referral order panel volunteers meet jointly with YOS case managers to improve practice, including revised contracts and refresher training. Quality assurance of Referral Orders is now an ongoing process enabling the routine review of report and contracts quality, alongside regular observation of live panels.
• The YOS has much closer working relationships with the Early Help service which means the YOS can access a better off for parenting. In addition,
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20
the "Respect" toolkit training has been delivered to YOS case managers to enhance service delivery around violence in personal relationships, including intimate/family relationships.
• We have maintained our low rate of breach panels through our ongoing SUCCeSSfUI engagement and embedded practice with children and young people who work with us from out of court disposals through to court orders.
• Case Managers have undertaken Brief Intervention Training delivered by the Youth Drug and Alcohol Project (YDAP which now sits alongside the YOS In Targeted Youth Services. We will continue to review our joint working with YDAP to see if this is leading to better outcomes for young people.
To support further improvement for reoffending, the following additional areas have been identified for further development as well as those noted above:
• Stronger links need to be made with the strategic MSET work programme to ensure that CSE is also being recognised as a safeguarding concern.
• Stronger strategic links are needed with social care to ensure consistency in harmful sexual behaviour, including AIM2 procedures.
3 - A restorative justice approach
• Sunderland YOS has retained the Restorative Justice Charter Mark, awarded to services who can demonstrate that they meet the Restorative Service Standards around the provision of a safe and effective restorative service.
• The service has been able to maintain its dedicated victim worker resources in order to be able to deliver a focused support service.
4 - Work to reduce NEET
• The YOS has a dedicated inclusion officer and wrap around staff to maintain a fOCUS on education, training and employment. In 201 7/18 26 children were successfully reintegrated back into school. A qualitative review is planned for 2018/19 to monitor the quality and outcomes being achieved through these resources.
• The YOS integration into the early help work programme is supporting the identified of "not knowns" for education, training and employment
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20
Changes to Governance and Service Delivery
As is identified within the Structure and Governance section below, the YOS has now transitioned into a new Children's Services model whereby we sit in TogetherforChildren which is a CIC owned by Sunderland Council
Learning from Inspections
The YOS Partnership is routinely presented with analysis papers and recommendations for action in relation to Inspection Reports and Good Practice Research following their publication. The YOS Management Team proactively reviews good practice and inspection outcomes internally with staff to consider local practice through Team meetings and practice workshops.
Included within the service development priorities for 201 8/1 9 are 2 projects being considered as a result of the consideration of recently published national Inspection reports.
Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20Delivery of Youth Justice in 2019/20
For 201 8/1 9, the YOS has reviewed its internal targets in relation to the three key outcomes of preventing offending, reducing reoffending and use of custody.
The three performance targets therefore are:
KEY OUTCOMEOUTCOME TARGETEntering the Youth Justice 
System (First Time
EntrantsTo continue to improve performance on first time entrantsReducing ReoffendingTo maintain performance on re-offending in line with national ex ectations.Maintaining low levels of custodial sentencinTo maintain a low use of custodial sentencingThe YOS is confident, based upon its historical performance, that these targets can be achieved.
Service Development Priorities for 2018 - 2020
To ensure that the service effectively responds to local and national priorities in relation to youth justice and wider key strategic agendas, the service will have a focus in the next two years on the following areas:
1 - A preventative approach to reducing first time entrants
2 - Reducing Reoffending
3 - Partnership engagement and development
The detail of the work programme which underpins how these are driven forward is set out within a separate Delivery Plan for each year which underpins the overarching YOS Strategy.
12Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20Service Development Priorities 2018-2020
PRIORITY 1 - reducing first time entrants
1 .1Pilot Safe Stop to protect young people from committing crime, becomin victims of crime.1 .2Work in partnership with schools to identify a pilot for a diversionary RJ diversion scheme - embedding the principles and good practice learned from the LAC rotocol.1 .3Work with the Vulnerable Adolescent Strategic Group to consider the need for a vulnerable adolescent toolkit and risk assessment1 .4Contribute to the multi-agency review of how we respond more effectively to young people involved in Anti-Social Behaviour so as to increase en agement levels with Wear Kids1 .5To contribute to the development of VIP meetings in partnership with Northumbria Police and the ASB team to identify young people at risk of involvement with CJS s stem1 .6To contribute to the development of the Safer Schools Partnership1 .7Review and agree model of working with young people out of court in partnership with police (in line with recommendations from Out of Court Disposal Work in Youth Offending Teams - Thematic Report .1 .8Work with Early Help to develop a model of early intervention with families where young people exhibit inappropriate harmful sexual behaviour.1 .9To review use of assessment framework to free up staff time for direct work with youn eo lePRIORITY 2 - reducing reoffending
2.1Train staff in understanding trauma and the impact it has on young eo le's behaviour.2.2Work with relevant partners to develop model of working in relation to trauma (Thematic Report - The work of youth offending teams to protect the public - enhanced case model pilot in Wales .2.3Embed a more robust model across early help and social care in relation to AIM2 assessment and delive of low level interventions.2.4Implement through our early help partnership the Respect Young People's Programme and Respect Toolkit, an accredited programme that works with adolescents who perpetrate domestic violence a ainst their arents.2.5Ensure all staff are trained in Prevent2.6To develop a model of offering voluntary interventions for young eo le excluded from school2.6To ensure parents are offered accredited parenting programmes and support across the service.13Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20PRIORITY 3 - partnership engagement and development
3.1Secure resources and commitment from health to design and implement a clear model to deliver trauma based practice based on the Enhanced Case Mana ement model piloted in Welsh YOTSWithin Together for Children, the YOS will support and contribute to the "Early Help" offer in the city for young people and their parents/carers. The service development priorities for 2018-2020 identified above have been therefore considered within this context and agreed with the YOS Partnership Board.
Workforce and Specialist Resources
Moving into 2019/20 , the YOS maintains its core staffing resources in relation to the full-time Staff, multi-agency secondees, (volunteers and sessional staff and is therefore compliant with the minimum staffing requirements set out in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. However the loss of funding for Liaison and Diversion remains a significant challenge for the service if it is to maintain current performance
Included within the appendices to this plan is a structure chart for the YOS alongside a table which breaks down staffing by agency, gender and ethnicity. All core YOS staff are trained in elements of restorative justice relevant to their post. All Referral Order Panel volunteer members have been trained in RJ relevant to their roles. The YOS continues to also provide robust supervision, training and management of its sessional workers who support in the delivery of RJ work, advocacy and Appropriate adult responsibilities.
The YOS Restorative Justice Team has one accredited practitioner and the other is undertaking accreditation.
YOS Management Board Oversight
The YOS Management Board maintains oversight of YOS resources through regular reports across the financial year.
14Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS
HEALTH
COMMUNITY SAFETY:
CAMHS
Anti-Social
• Community
CAMHS
• CYPS	Community Safety
• Speech and
	Language	Domestic Violence
• Paediatric	working group
• Forensic

The multi-agency Sunderland YOS Management Board remains as an identified 'significant partnership' for Sunderland and it also provides the strategic links with other significant partnerships, and their associated strategic plans across children's services, criminal justice and community safety. The YOS Management Board also continues to be linked into the Safer Sunderland Partnership which is the local Community Safety
Partnership, by acting as a key delivery group in supporting delivery of the Safer Sunderland Strategy 2008-2023 to ensure that "everyone in Sunderland will be, and feel, safe and secure".
The Targeted Youth Services Manager who retains responsibility for the YOS service is also a member of the Sunderland Safeguarding Children's Board Vulnerable Adolescents Strategic Group. YOS Managers also contribute as needed to relevant safeguarding sub-committees supporting service development and quality review.
The evolution of the youth justice service in Sunderland into Together for Children targeted youth support services from 1 st April 2017 has brought opportunities for improvement partnership working. The YOS remains committed to working in partnership with others around the key issues affecting young people today including significant and emerging problems around sexual and criminal exploitation exploitation, domestic abuse, substance misuse excluded from school or NEET and the prevent agenda.
15Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20Partnership working continues to be strong in the city and is supporting the service developments being achieved by the service. Specific examples include:
Substance Misuse
The co-location of substance misuse services in the YOS is providing opportunities to embed joint working and improve quality and delivery of brief interventions.
Parenting
Swifter access to parenting support is being secured through Early Help which offers Triple Teen Parenting in groups and individually.
Police
Improved relationship with police at a Team manager level is supporting regular practice review and a reinvigorated IOM process which is producing creative solutions to interventions and support.
ASB
16Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20The partnership with the ASB Team is enabling Wear Kids to identify young people at risk of entering the criminal justice system. This model is being reviewed on a multi-agency basis to ensure we are effective in targeting those most at risk.
Missing, sexually exploited and trafficked (MSET)
The YOS is integrated into this process ; a senior practitioner with support from one of the seconded Police Officers who is CEOP trained attend monthly operational meetings.
Vulnerable Adolescents
The YOS is a member of Vulnerable Adolescent Strategic Group and through this is influencing agency response to teenagers.
Children's Services
The LAC protocol remains in place and is being SUCCeSSfUIIy delivered.
LCJB
The YOS sits on the Strategic Group for Tyne and Wear YOTS.
prevent
The YOS supports and is a member of the City Council's Prevent protocol and practice which includes channel processes. Relevant staff have been trained in relation to the Prevent agenda.
Probation
Sunderland YOS has implemented national protocol but has lost a part time seconded PO We will therefore work to ensure transition work is built upon
through our work with NPS utilising the skills of the remaining seconded probation officer.
MAPPA
The YOS continues to utilise MAPPA arrangements to in relation to those young people who pose significant risks within the community
17Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20Resettlement
The critical needs of young people being resettled into the community continue to be reported within the service's Performance Report for the YOS Management Board and there are robust internal processes that ensure timely and appropriate planning takes place in advance of release. The service has maintained its wrap around advocate staff which support young people on release from custody or at risk of custody.


YOS Partnership Risk Register
The Partnership Risk Register reflects the key risks for the service at a strategic level. This therefore predominantly continues to highlight financial resources as a key risk alongside partnership engagement and the emerging national strategic perspectives in a changing landscape for youth justice.
In terms of risks in relation to youth justice outcomes, the YOS continues to maintain very good performance in terms of low use of custody. This Y J outcome isn't considered a high risk for Sunderland.
18Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20In relation to FTEs, there have been some critical improvements implemented which are driving improved progress on FTEs. This has been driven by our excellent partnership arrangements within the city. However, there are risks considered in relation to being able to sustain a longer term drive around this agenda given the short term funding position for liaison and diversion.
There is also risk in relation to maintaining and improving performance round reoffending as this cohort is a far more complex one than ever and will need a multi-agency approach to effect long- term change. This will need to be a critical fOCUS for the fUtUre as we know from profile of young people in the criminal justice system that they are a more complex group of young people. In order to reduce offending in a climate of reducing resources we will need to work creatively with partners.
There are key challenges locally across the YOS partnership in being able to meet the demands and wider needs of children and young people given the inequalities in the city. A further critical element therefore is to ensure that the services the children and young people we work with are being accessed appropriately, ie CAMHS. For the internal services on offer from the YOS, we already know that we will need to revise our Youth Drug and Alcohol Programme brief interventions given the level of substance misuse in the IO1 7 population.
YOS BOARD PARTNERSHIP APPROVAL19Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20SUNDERLAND YOS BOARD MEMBERSHIP
CHAIRJill Colbert, Chief Executive, Together for ChildrenStatutory PartnersIan Halliday, Clinical Commissioning GroupNorthumbria Police, Don WadeKarin O'Neill, NPSLocal
Authority
PartnersKaren Davison, Director of Early HelpSimon MarshallLinda Mason, Targeted Youth Services ManagerCouncillor Louise FarthingCourtEducationBeverley Blackstone Sunderland CollegeSimon Marshall, Director of Education, Together for ChildrenYOS Board members considered and agreed the contents of the YOS Plan at the Partnership Board meeting held on the 2nd September.


ABA	Acceptable Behaviour Agreement
CBO	Criminal Behaviour Order
ETE	Education, Training and Employment
FTE	First Time Entrants
Home Office
IOM	Integrated Offender Management
IRS	Intensive Resettlement and Support
Iss	Intensive Supervision and Surveillance
20Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20LAC	Looked After Children
LASPO	Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders (Act)
LCJB	Local Criminal Justice Board
Liaison and Diversion
MOJ	Ministry of Justice
Restorative Justice
YJB	Youth Justice Board
YRO	Youth Rehabilitation Order
YOS	Youth Offending Service
MOT	Youth Offending Team
HOW TO CONTACT USSunderland Youth Offending Service's base is in the city centre:
Staff and service user base:
76 High Street West
21Sunderland Youth Justice Plan 2018-20Sunderland SRI IIJP
0191 561 7301
Email: yos@sunderland.togetherforchildren.org.uk
If you would like this document in any other format, please do not hesitate to contact the staff at the base above.






