Surrey Youth Justice Plan 2019-20 


Service Surrey Youth Offending Service
Service Lead Dr Lisa Bursill - Assistant Director Early Help and Hubs
Family Resilience and SafeguardingCo-Chair for Children Justice and Policing Partnership Board

 Nev Kemp QPM
T/Deputy Chief ConstableCo-Chair for Children Justice and Policing Partnership Board

Jacqui Burke 
Director for Family Resilience & Safeguarding, 

INTRODUCTION 
Since 2000 there has been a requirement through the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 for Youth Offending Teams (YOTS) and their partnerships to produce a Youth Justice Plan setting out how YOTs will be resourced in the local area and the services which will be available in relation to the statutory primary aim of YOTs to prevent youth offending in the area. 
Our YJ Plan for 2019-20 sets a new direction for our Youth Offending Service (YOS), and moves away from our previous five-year strategic plan which was due for renewal in 2020.  A change of direction is required, driven by a partnership commitment to better understand the drivers and impact in the system, to improve quality and to underpin our formal youth justice practice.   
Our plan this year will focus on gaining a greater understanding of the needs of young people offending, of developing more robust partnership arrangements, and looking at national best practice to improve the quality of our approaches and practice.  We will examine the experience of our services for young people offending or at risk of offending, moving beyond the view from performance measures to ensure that outcomes are based on our values and principles and the lived experience of children in the system.   
We remain wholly committed to retaining a strong child-first ethos and an integrated service because this has delivered significant gains for our young people in terms of life chances and overall outcomes.  These principles, well embedded in Surrey, now lie at the heart of the Youth Justice Board framework for YOTs in England and Wales, and give us a strong base from which to re-imagine our services. 
A detailed action plan to achieve our fresh ambitions will be monitored by the Children's Policing and Justice Partnership Board (CPJPB) and will set out areas for action under five work streams: 
1. Leadership and Governance 
2. Data, Performance and Information 
3. Review and Redesign of Out of Court Disposals 
4. Pathways and Partnerships 
5. Staffing and Skills 
 
CONTEXT 
Children Services in Surrey received an 'Inadequate' Ofsted rating in our 2018 full inspection. This has led to a complete system transformation by the County Council to improve how the Council delivers services in a way that reflects the changing way in which our residents and communities now live their lives and to ensure that vital services are delivered where they are needed most.  
 
We want to help create better lives, a better place and a County where no-one is left behind. To deliver our vision, we recognise we need to change the way we work, to do that quickly and deliver our services more effectively. In September 2018, through this change and improvement work, we began to look below the strong performance figures of our Youth Offending service to review the quality of the organisation and delivery, and in November, we commissioned a Health Check.  As anticipated, the Health Check highlighted concerns: we found that we did not have a clear understanding of the needs of young people at risk in Surrey and that our assessments and delivery did not always have sufficient rigour and expertise through existing partnership arrangements.  
 
Surrey had negotiated an opt out from the national standards use of Asset Plus in 2016, and the Health check evidenced that this had eroded skills and quality and that it weakened assessments of risk, safety and wellbeing; additionally it left us without a single system through which we could analyse desistance factors across the population.  The Board made a decision to return to Asset Plus, and this took effect in January 2019.  In addition, our findings informed a whole system re-structure, creating a dedicated adolescent service comprising Targeted Youth Support (TYS) and Safeguarding Adolescents Teams (SAT) who work across targeted and statutory thresholds to keep children safe.  Within these teams, designated staff are assigned the youth justice work in recognition of the specific skills required.  This is a significant change from our previous model which placed greater value on holistic practice than on evidence-based youth offending practice.  We have retained a central YOS team under the Assistant director of Early Help and Hubs to drive practice, learning and improvement and to ensure consistency across the four area-based teams. This team, too, will be strengthened to provide assurance of quality practice and to support our improvement plans.   
 
The YOS Management Board was combined with Police Youth Partnership Board in 2018 to align work-streams for children offending, and is now the 'Children's Policing and Justice Partnership Board', co-chaired by both the Director for Safeguarding and Family Resilience and the Assistant Chief Constable. To give members a refreshed understanding of the YOS and their role in supporting this, an induction session was held in November 2018 and role profiles were drawn up for each board member.  The findings of the Health check together with outstanding areas from the Youth Justice Plan 2018 were developed into a work plan for the Board and for partners in the spring, and these were in the early stages of implementation when HMIP arrived to inspect the work of the YOS in June 2019.  
 
YOUTH JUSTICE STRATEGIC PLAN 2015-20 - PROGRESS UPDATE KEY ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES OF 2018-19 
 
 
The stated aim of the strategic plan 2015-20 is: to enable children and young people at risk of, or involved in offending, to lead safe, law abiding lives, in order to reach their full potential and make a positive contribution to their community. 
   
In writing a plan for 2019, the aim remains the same, and every day, staff work at capacity and with care and attention to provide the very best possible support to young people who offend, their families and identified victims.  Young people are uniquely diverted from the formal youth justice system to allow them to reach their potential, and this continues to result in remarkable performance for the service and to be the envy of YOTs nationally.  If we are seeking to measure whether young people are then able to make a positive contribution to their community however, a deeper measure of impact is required which is not yet in place. 
 	 
Reviewing progress on last year's plan highlights that many of the targets and ambitions were based on continuing success measures and maintaining the service approach.  Achievements, however, include the following which are largely outside of the stated actions of the last plan (figures are April 18 to March 19 approved data): 
 
• Continued progress in reducing our First Time Entrants with a rate of 91 per 10,000 population (reduced 14 percentage points on the level last year).   
• Reduced custody rates at 0.05 per 1,000 population, three times lower than the YOT family grouping or the south east regional figure. 
• Induction session and role profiles for Board members 
• Full review of the quality of service prior to the inspection 
• Improvement on the criminalisation of young people in care homes through Surrey's early involvement in the national protocol and restorative justice training provided. 
• Developed an early draft of a profile of young people offending across Surrey 
• Worked in collaboration with several VCS groups to deliver gang and knife crime interventions where needed 
• Supported the development of a Serious Youth Violence strategy and implementation plan 
• Provided in-reach support to young people in custody, preparing them for training and employment 
• Worked with the Skills Mill to develop a post-16 offer for young people involved in offending behaviour 
• Delivered three Asset plus external training sessions for managers and practitioners 
• Reviewed our processes and procedures 
• Delivered a workshop to our senior management team around custody and resettlement 
• Reviewed our partnership delivery arrangements and provided clarity around future arrangements 
• Re-formed our staff teams and re-instated our Youth Offending Service team meetings 
 
 
Our current assessment of our service needs means that the previous targets do not well match the current position of the service.  An internal review followed by an inspection has evidenced that some of the aims and targets for the service lacked substance or that they were achievable through the lens of performance rather than through quality success criteria.  During the last year, it is not the YJ Plan which has delivered change, but a change of focus and change of approach to re-instate the foundations of a youth offending framework and to fix our attention on the experience of young people, victims, parents and communities rather than performance outcomes.  Our plan this year seeks to bring about rapid but steady change and contains entirely new priorities. 
 
Complementing our new focus, we will undertake the National Standards self-assessment work, ready to report our findings by March 2020.  We anticipate that this will reflect the HMIP inspection findings but will also evidence green shoots of improvement and the foundations of strong practice for the service going forward. 
 
This year, new leadership and management is in place for the Youth Offending Service in addition to new team structures which have only been operational since May 2019.  So much change presents a huge challenge in maintaining strong practice, but also exciting opportunities in the improvements that it will enable.  Although the period of re-structure was inevitably difficult for everyone, staff are now optimistic and feel better contained and supported than previously, and this is evident in their enthusiasm to take on new skills and to use evidence-based practice in their work.  Within six weeks of a re-structure, Asset plus training had been delivered to managers and practitioners and we have begun to see better informed assessment of risk to others and of safety and wellbeing which, in turn, enables better informed plans of support.  It will take time to increase skills levels and to embed our new learning, but we are now clearly sighted on becoming a professional team able to give the very best to the young people of Surrey.  For our service, this is the beginning of a determined effort to undertake child-first work more effectively and purposefully and to understand our individual and cohort groups of young people so that we can better target our resources and understand where services are missing. 
 
Our staff are committed to engaging in our priority actions for the future, and have provided us with their views on three key subjects: how to achieve good child-centred practice; how to build effective partnership working; and what the Board should understand about their work with young people who offend.  We have included aspects of this feedback into our improvement plan, evidencing ownership by the staff team of our ambitions. 
 
Lessons learned through a number of complex cases, as well as a recent thematic inspection on resettlement has led us to focus on resettlement and our most complex young people as an area for improvement.  In particular, we can see that the very best outcomes for these young people require service redesign, closer links with the care leaver's and statutory social work teams and with colleagues in Housing and post-16 education. Our new structures support this through the co-design of the Safeguarding Adolescents Team (level 4 statutory) and the Targeted Youth Support Team (level 3 targeted) and the shift within Children's Services to models of contextual safeguarding for adolescents. 
 
Our Knife Crime and Serious Youth Violence Strategy has completed its data collation phase and will support the management of prevention and intervention for some of our most vulnerable young people. The strategy will inform a Surry wide approach and the commissioning of resources.  This will provide us with a more complete and consistent set of tools with which to work with young people at risk this year as part of the Surrey public health approach to serious youth violence. 
    
PARTNERSHIP RESPONSE TO INDIVIDUAL & THEMATIC INSPECTIONS 
Our service was involved in the thematic inspection of custody and re-settlement, published in August 2019.  The case of a Surrey young person detained in Cookham Wood YOI was assessed by HMI to determine how effective the joint planning had been in supporting successful re-settlement into the community.  HMI interviewed the case holder for this young person and viewed the records on the case management system.  The young person was not available for interview. 
At case level, the work was below the standard required for successful re-settlement.  The short-fall was a result of poor partnership working particularly in respect of accommodation.  The thematic report notes: the timely provision of safe and suitable accommodation remained problematic for a small number of children, some of whom did not know where they were going to live until the day of release or very shortly before.  In the Surrey case, the impact for this young person of uncertainty led to a challenging start to his period of community supervision and almost immediate return to court for failure to comply.  Although he was not returned to custody, this did effect his motivation.   
The report is due to be discussed at the CPJP Board in September, and a workshop in August with senior Social Care Colleagues provided an outline of both the barriers and the opportunities in this work going forward.  A future input to highlight required practice for young people in custody and resettlement will be developed for delivery within the Children's Academy programme which will embed this knowledge across the whole workforce over time.  Training will focus particularly on roles and responsibilities and timeliness.  Service Managers have already met to review the process of allocation and planning to ensure that every child in youth detention is a service priority from the earliest stage. 
In June, the Youth Offending Service was subject to a single inspection by HMIP.  The inspection highlighted long-standing and systemic issues which have led to weak practice across each of the domains.  The results, published at the end of August, were anticipated following a series of audits and a Health Check at the end of 2018 which presented the same issues found by the inspection team.  Seeking to repair and resolve the issues, the proposed re-structure of teams and services across Children's Services included new plans to create a Targeted Youth Support Team within each quadrant to lead on youth justice and supported the up-skilling and professionalization of those staff undertaking this work.  The Board had put its own plan in place to support improved practice within the service, and has embraced the inspection as a helpful and accurate critique of practice.  Our 2019 annual Youth Justice Plan now focuses on those and wider improvements which align fully with Surrey's response to the inspection recommendations. 
 
STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE 
Structure 
In Surrey, the statutory functions of the YOS are now undertaken by the Targeted Youth Support and Safeguarding and Adolescents teams formed in May 2019.  These teams sit within locality based quadrants overseen by a locality Director.  The teams operate an integrated model, so that they are able to work with adolescents who are missing, not engaged with education or other statutory services and those with complex behaviours.  The ethos of the service is strongly child-first in its focus, and our model is one which builds trusting relationships through advocacy, role modelling and the use of motivational interviewing. 
Youth Justice Work is held and managed by staff with experience and skills in this area, but who have access to a wide range of support and services sitting alongside them within the quadrants.  Young people sentenced by the Courts and who may subsequently be subject  to exploitation concerns do not need to see a difference in their case manager because of the shift in concerns for them and the flexibility within the teams has been developed to maintain the consistency of trusted relationships.  All staff holding Court-sentenced outcomes have received Asset plus training in July this year, as well as their managers, and every assessment is signed off by a Youth Justice Team Manager who also provides management of these cases.  Further training is planned in September to increase the numbers of staff who are able to use the Asset plus assessment. 
Delivery of services is underpinned by a central youth justice team who manage quality, performance, provide training, guidance and oversight as well as having oversight of risl and restorative practice and responsibility for Court, bail and remand.  This team is managed by a Youth Offending Service manager reporting to the Assistant Director for Hubs and Family Resilience and who sits on the CPJP Board.  The team will be strengthened this year to increase operational management capacity; the restorative practice officers will undertake more victim work to improve on outcomes in this area, and the two days per week of a trained forensic practitioner will support formulation meetings and the management of cases where progress and impact is not being seen. Governance 
Since April 2018, the Children's Policing and Justice Partnership Board has held oversight and accountability for the Youth Offending Service allied with Police priorities around children in Surrey.  The Board is co-chaired by the Assistant Chief Constable and the Director of 
Safeguarding and Family Resilience, and reports through to the Children's Safeguarding Board (soon to be the Children's Executive) with links with the Community Safety Board.  Over the last year, Board members have taken part in an induction session in respect of the YOS and have all signed up to job roles to strengthen their sense of purpose in championing young people offending and at risk of offending in Surrey. 
The Board monitors the performance of the service, and has seen this go from good to outstanding, with the best First Time Entrants figures in the country, decreasing and low numbers of children in custody, and a fairly steady rate of re-offending comparable with the national figure.  Numbers of young people in the system are very low, and amidst many other areas of service requiring attention, the YOS has appeared to be an example of good practice.  However, performance monitoring has been very narrow and there has been little use of data beyond this statutory reporting.  There has been no profile of offending in Surrey and no evidence based understanding of the wider determinants of offending.  There is a clear understanding now that the Board has not provided sufficient challenge or sought to understand how the strong performance outcomes have been achieved and whether they provide a positive and impactful experience for young people, families, victims and communities.  This is set to change as we focus on strengthening the capability of the Board through better use of information and knowledge. 
Agency representation has been strengthened since January this year as the Board saw that it required more senior members in order to deliver improvements.  Following the inspection, an improvement work stream has been created around Leadership and Governance, and it is now proposed that an independent Chair is appointed for a period of a year to provide the support and challenge required for strong governance. 
  
RESOURCES AND VALUE FOR MONEY 
The Youth Justice Board conditions of grant specify that funding must be spent entirely on the delivery of youth justice services.  In order to be compliant with the Crime and Disorder Act guidance, the Youth Offending Service must include statutory partners from the Police, Health, National Probation Service, Education and Children's Social Care.  In Surrey, services and staffing have not followed a traditional pattern as they have been widely integrated, and resource from the statutory partnership has been delivered through a dispersed model where  contributions are not in the form of secondments, but through service agreements.  Over a period of time, this model has not necessarily provided the resources needed for children who are offending and has utilised some resources too widely so that their impact has not been felt for these children.  Much work has been done to address this already, however, and the model is now compliant in that each of the statutory partners delivers services specifically for young people offending or at risk of offending.  This year's staffing costs show the Partnership funding contribution of staff who either sit directly in service, or who work alongside us to achieve outcomes for young people offending or at risk of offending. 
The new delivery structures maintain the commitment to integrated services, but there is now a re-focus on the statutory youth justice functions and on a more visible and targeted partnership contribution to a service.  A work stream will further develop our partnership contributions, with the intention of asserting the need for specialist services to meet the complex needs of children offending and for ensuring that access to these services is swift and effective. 
To build a stronger core to the service, the central Youth Justice Team will increase its operational management capacity.  The Youth Justice grant will pay for this and a percentage of the locality delivery staff as outlined in the table below. 
 
 
 
Agency Staffing Costs Payments in kind Other delegated funds Total Police 161,175     161,175 Police and Crime Commissioner 0     0 Probation 40,000   5,000 45,000 Health 116,449     116,449 Local Authority 948,416     948,416 Welsh Government 0     0 YJB 624,101    0 624,101 Other 0     0 Total 1,890,141 0 5,000 1,895,141 ? 	The integrated delivery model makes it difficult to specify the ethnic profile of staff for the service.  The overall Children's Services staffing profile (excluding partner and commissioned services) is 94% white british and 6% BAME.  The gender profile is 65% female and 35% male. 
PARTNERSHIP ARRANGEMENTS 
Partnership arrangements for the YOS are not typical because of the fully integrated model. 
Police staff are not seconded into the service, but the Police contribution has been significant. A service level agreement has recently been developed to formalise the arrangements and now requires sign off and confirmation of delivery arrangements to include wider intelligence sharing and daily support.  For our service-wide mental health resources, Probation, our Education support, and our commissioned substance misuse services, new pathways and commissioning arrangements are under development to direct resources in a more targeted way towards young people offending, ensuring a proactive offer of support where desistance assessments highlight an area of need.  The mental health staff will now sit within the YOS services and will provide skills inputs to the team as well as assessing and working with those young people requiring support from them.  F Camhs attend our High Risk Panel meetings and we are fortunate in having a shared member of staff whose time within the YOS will focus on formulation meetings and supporting the understanding of more complex cases who may require specialist assessment and treatment.  Our Camhs staff will link with F Camhs and also with a community based mental health service available out of hours and based within youth centres.  We have re-started discussion with the Criminal Justice and Liaison Diversion Service (CJLD) to ensure that we have a pathway of services for young people as early as possible.  Through our joint working, the service is submitting a proposal for a professional advocacy service to follow the assessment in custody through to engagement in services in the community so that a young person is never picked up and put down with opportunities to disengage.  
 
The Education staff currently provide an advocacy service for those of school age, and a link with target schools, particularly the pupil referral units.  The workers sit on the school placement panels and take the referrals from YOS in order to ensure that accurate information is provided for the right provision.  Our improvement work will see this strengthened through senior Board members for Vulnerable Learners and clearer processes to follow for those not receiving their statutory entitlement to learning.   
 
The new structure has positioned a Youth Offer Development Officer under the YOS Manager, and he has created some opportunities for post-16 training and employment which we will soon be able to offer to young people not in education, training and employment.  The offer covers a range of training options and includes the Skills Mill programme which has a strong evidence base through its work with young people in YOTS in the North East.  We have so far visited three young people in custody to plan for a post-16 offer on release, with one of these currently in the second month of this community offer.  For another young person, this formed part of their ISS package. 
 
A large number of young people receive outcomes related to cannabis or substance misuse more generally and yet referrals have been low.  Pathways to the service have been strengthened as well as a process for monitoring the referrals, and the provider will now come to YOS team meetings to answer questions on the service and to support practitioners with any individual case queries.  For this service and the Camhs service, we will provide guidance to practitioners around consent, and around using their motivational interviewing skills to encourage engagement. 
 
We have increased our Probation resource to develop improved arrangements for transition of our young people and to increase our operational capability around the management of risk.  Our Probation Officers now link with the High Harm Protection Unit (HHPU, formerly IOM) and  provide the team expertise around MAPPA cases, holding or advising on those cases where appropriate.  Our high risk cases are reviewed monthly at High Risk Panel, and actions to manage risk are recorded both on the child's file and on a central file.  The Assistant Director responsible for the YOS receives the list of very high risk cases, and incidents are escalated to the Director who is the co-chair of the Board. 
 
Where NPS are unable to provide prison visits and meet young people in person at their custodial centre, the YOS Probation Officer will hold most of these cases until they are in the community to ensure a more child-centred approach for young people making a transition to adult services.  Our local custody centre is Cookham Wood.  We have a good relationship of support and challenge with staff at the centre, but plan to develop link staff and to consider how we can improve our offer for detained young people.  
 
Our involvement in the thematic inspection on custody and resettlement as well as our audits shows us that we need to improve our assessments, planning and co-working for children on Child Protection plans, those who are Looked After and those who are Care Leavers.  We are beginning a piece of scoping work through a social work student to review the processes that have been followed for these young people and to propose some new protocols to simplify our involvement and to ensure that both safeguarding and criminal justice legislation operates effectively together.  The close relationship within the localities between the TYS team and statutory SATs team also provides us with an opportunity for better daily communication and understanding of each other's duties and roles. 
 
In reviewing our out of court disposals, we also see an opportunity to expand the joint decision making panel to include our children's single point of access (CSPA).  The YOS shares the same Assistant Director as the CSPA, and screening of those young people at an early stage of offending will lead to better join up of preventive services when a young person is offered a community resolution or a Caution/Conditional Caution.  This work will begin within one of the improvement work plans and provides an opportunity to explore a preventative approach to youth crime which could be offered prior to sanctions. 
 
RISKS TO FUTURE DELIVERY 
With a significant amount of change to undertake, Surrey YOS faces some key risk to future deliver, particularly in maintaining its strong performance against national indicators. 
• A review of the Out of Court Disposal scheme may lead to more young people becoming first time entrants and/or there an increase in proven re-offending.  The impact on performance will need to be assessed but is likely to evidence a down-turn.  
• There is an increase in young people appearing in court for offences of serious violence potentially leading to an increase in those sentenced to custody. 
• There is an increase in drugs offences including offences relating to supply. 
• A coherent response to contextual safeguarding is required quickly to provide effective joined up working. 
• Surrey Police has commenced a diversion scheme for adults and youths who do not initially admit guilt.  `Checkpoint' will require some of the same resources as is currently allocated to the YOS. 
• The re-structure of services is now complete, but the service is seeing a second wave of staff leaving their posts to go elsewhere.  Improving service delivery is contingent on sufficiency and retention of skilled staff 
• Staff require significant training to improve their court report writing skills and we are seeing an increase in young people in court. 
• Capacity in the central team is insufficient to provide assurance of quality and lead on improvement. 
• Accommodation for young people leaving custody needs review 
 	 
YOUTH JUSTICE PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
Performance is measured against the three National Indicators for the Youth Justice System, introduced in April 2011.  These are: 
1. First Time Entrants to the youth justice system 
2. Re-offending of young people in the youth justice system 
3. Use of custody for young people 
 
Surrey has continued to improve on its performance measures, evidencing amongst the best comparative rates in all three categories. 
 
1. First Time Entrants per 100,000 10-17 population 
 
First Time Entrant Rate Surrey's Ranking  Surrey South East England Against SE Against England Jan 18-
Dec 18 91 168 238  
1 of 29  
1 of 140 Jan 17-
Dec 17 105 214 296  First Time Entrants figures have continued to fall and are the lowest per 100,000 in England.  Over a ten year period, rates have fallen by 93%.   
 

 
 
? The profile of these young people is 47% post 16 (education) at the date of outcome and 11% BAME with 19% female/81% male. 
 	 

2. Reoffending of young people in the youth justice system 
 
Reoffending rates are a challenge to maintain as numbers in the system grow smaller.  Inevitably, the cohort we see in the system is more entrenched in their behaviours and face more complex needs impacting their desistance.  Adding weight to this, our figures show that those young people who have re-offended have committed a higher number of offences than the national picture.at 4.31 which is above the SE average of 4.22 and above the national average of 3.66.  This is a concern for Surrey and something that we need to focus attention on once we understand this cohort better.  We will use the re-offending toolkit to properly track our higher risk offenders in future and will also review the quality of our interventions. 
 	 
Local Reoffending is based on a 3 month cohort (Jan - Mar) tracked for one year.  This is split into formal (substantive outcomes), YRIs and a total. 
Reoffending in Surrey Surrey's Ranking  Surrey South East England Against SE Against England Jul 16 - Jun 17 40.5% 38.8% 40.1%   % change compared 
to Jul 16 - Jun 16 4.2% -0.7% -1.8%  
The table below is a local indicator of offending which illustrates the YRI and the formal outcome re-offending.   

• Levels of re-offending for those receiving a YRI are around 17% compared with 25% for those with formal outcomes.  The counting rules mean that if a young person receives a YRI for their offence, this is not a proven offence and does not count as a re-offending incident.  The YRI is used extensively in Surrey and changes in its use will impact our re-offending rates. 
• There is an evident increase in the re-offending trend across the board, but the increase for those with formal outcomes needs further investigation to see whether we can intervene to prevent it increasing further.  We have commenced a small research project to gather information in support of this. 
 
3. Use of custody for young people 
Surrey courts continue to make very low use of custody with fewer than 10 young people sentenced to custody in each of the last seven years.  The confidence of the courts in the YOS plays a large part in achieving these figures, but the increase in serious youth violence and county lines coupled with new sentencing guidelines is likely to impact this over the next twelve months.  To mitigate this, we are strengthening our Intensive Supervision and Surveillance (ISS) programme to include a robust post-16 skills and training offer; we are also strengthening our management of risk through a more rigorous Risk Management Meeting, improving links with HPPU and MAPPA and working with colleagues to improve our contextual safeguarding response.   We are using learning from a recent resettlement case to improve understanding across the partnership of the importance of early resettlement planning.  Cases will be subject to a case tracker in future which will be reviewed regularly to ensure all agencies are working together, taking account of the views of the young person towards an agreed plan. 
 
Custody rate  Surrey South East England April 18 - Mar 19 0.05 0.16 0.30 % change compared to Apr 17- Mar 18 0.04 0.01 -0.07  
 
 	 
 
 
 
 
Local Indicator - Looked After Children Offending 


There were 473 young people aged 10-17 who had been looked after for a minimum of 12 months as of 31/03/18.  Of these, 17 received a caution or conviction in 2017/18 (3.6%).  Although the % of looked after children offending has reduced considerably and continues to remain low, children looked after are still more likely to be in the criminal justice system than their counterparts.  08/09  
LAC 
Cohort 09/10  
LAC 
Cohort  10/11 
LAC 
Cohort 11/12 
LAC 
Cohort 12/13 
LAC 
Cohort 13/14  
LAC 
Cohort 14/15 
LAC 
Cohort 15/16 
LAC 
Cohort 16/17 
LAC 
Cohort 17/18 
LAC 
Cohort Total LAC cohort 424 432 373 358 384 378 393 411 480 473 No. Of LAC offending 50 38 36 25 23 21 21 13 16 17 No. of LAC placed in county offending 20 of 
186 18 of 
189 24 of 
184 6 of 
176 10 of 
197 9 of 
194 9 of 
184 4 of 
193 4 of 
227 4 of 
226 No. of LAC placed out county offending 30 of 
236 20 of 
243 12 of 
189 19 of 
182 13 of 
187 12 of 
184 12 of 
209 9 of 
216 12 of 
253 13 of 
247  
The biggest reduction in looked after children offending has been with young people placed in Surrey due to a protocol to promote restorative outcomes for this cohort, particularly for offences committed in the placement setting.  4 of 13 of the out county offences were committed in the placement setting. 

• There have been robust measures put in place through a local protocol to prevent looked after children entering the youth justice system in Surrey.     
• There were 6 looked after children from the cohort who entered the criminal justice system for the first time in 2017/18.  2 of these were placed in county and 4 were out county.  Of the 2 in county first time entrants - one pleaded not guilty and the other had committed a serious offence. 
 
 	 
13 
 Diversity and disproportionality 
In Surrey, 12 % of the youth population is classed as BAME, with 14% of those aged 1517.  Our data shows a relatively high percentage of children where the ethnicity is not recorded, and this relates to the use of different systems and tools over time.  Our current processes provide quality assurance against capturing this data.  Alongside this, Surrey is said to have the second highest number of Gypsy, Roma Travellors (GRT), and it is clear that many young people with GRT heritage are classifying themselves as White British, and that their cultural background is not being captured.  Our `Other White' category also includes 5.7% of the population who are Eastern European, and again, our records do not sufficiently analyse the diversity needs for this population group. 
 
 
Percentage and type of offences committed by BAME

? 	With 12% of the Surrey youth population classed as BAME, the table above shows clear disproportionality in the Breach of Order offences and also for Robbery, Sexual Offences and Drugs offences; violence against the person is also disproportionately high.   
The data for Surrey supports the findings of the Lammy report, with particular emphasis here on the high proportion of breach offences committed by BAME young people.  The 
Lammy report finds that there is less trust in the criminal justice system on the part of the BAME community and also finds that this community may face greater structural disadvantage as well as experiencing harsher sanctions and different decisions compared with White counterparts even with similar circumstances within the system.  A particular focus for us will now be on ensuring compliance for BAME youth and on targeted prevention services and community engagement.  Surrey Police are piloting the Checkpoint programme which will seek to work with and divert those who do not admit guilt for their offence.  The Lammy report recommends this approach particularly for BAME cohorts or individuals where there appears to be less trust in the system than for White British defendants. 
 
Percentage of young people receiving a custodial sentence by ethnicity 

? 	Custodial sentences in 2018 show some disproportionality at 25% of the total nonWhite, although these numbers are low. (see custody and remand figures for a further breakdown). 
In February 2019, we sampled eight cases where the young person had been sentenced to custody to find that 4 had mixed heritage although some classified themselves as white-British; one of these faced deportation at maturity.  Our custody tracker will help us to identify where we can work more effectively if we understand the diversity factors for each young person. 
 
 
Knife Crime Offences 
Knife crime rates in 2010/11 compared with 2017/18 evidence that Surrey has the lowest rate of selected violence offences involving a knife per 100,000 of all Police areas with 5 per 100,000 compared with 168 per 100,000 for the Metropolitan Police Service.  However, locally, there is an ancrease which shows that this is an emerging issue in Surrey which is beginning to have an impact on perception of safety, to be causing injury to victims, and to be slowly increasing the numbers of young people in the youth justice system. 
The increase appears to be driven by several factors: young people are carrying knives to protect themselves due to feeling unsafe; and there is evidence of young people being exploited by organised criminal groups to transport and deal drugs. 
Our Public Health approach to Serious Youth Violence is now working to identify evidencebased programmes to prevent and tackle this issue for our young people.  We now have a good data profile which will develop into an implementation plan, giving us congruence in our approach and a common set of principles and tools for our work and for the commissioning of services.  This will be a priority area of work for the YOS in the coming year and will help us to reduce our numbers of young people at risk of custody and to reduce the fear of knife crime evident across the youth population. 
 	 
Number of knife crime offences committed year on year since 2015 

? 	Knife crime offences have increased by 78% since 2016 and 23% in the last year.  This is above the national average which saw a rise of 64% in the five year period and 7% in the last year (2017 to 2018). 
So far in 2019 here have been 32 knife offences committed resulting in a court or out of court disposal. 64% of these offences have resulted in an out of court disposal so that court orders remain fairly low.  2 young people were remanded in custody for offences involving a knife (one of these was released on a hospital order). As we review our out of court disposal scheme, we may see knife crime offences charged to court routinely and, therefore, see an apparent increase in knife crime through our change of process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education and SEND 
A review of all court and out of court disposals between Jan 17 and June 18 told us that: 
• Young people with court outcomes are more likely to have Special Educational needs (64%) and not attend mainstream education (52%). One In 6 will have been permanently excluded at some point and/or have been a child missing education.  
• Young people subject to a YRI administered by Surrey Family Service are more likely to have a special educational need (59.9%) and be on role at a mainstream school (73.6%). 
• SEMH and BESD are the most represented additional need and cover a range of difficulties which a formal justice system may amplify 
The graphs below show current case load information which is still showing us that huge improvements need to be made to ensure young people receive their statutory allocation to education. 
 

 
 
 
 
 	 
HMIP INSPECTION RECOMMENDATIONS 
The inspection provided nine recommendations for improvement which have been used to develop our action and improvement plan: 
The Youth Offending Service Manager should: 
 
1. Review all current out-of-court and post-court cases and take necessary action to ensure that children and young people are safe, and that appropriate plans are in place to manage any risk of harm to others 
 
2. Commission training to develop staff skills and knowledge in key areas of practice specific to working with children and young people in the youth justice system 
 
3. Ensure all staff receive regular support from a manager with knowledge of youth justice work and that management oversight is consistent, effective and makes a difference to the quality of work 
 
4. Use suitable assessment tools, accurately assess the risk to a child or young person's safety and wellbeing and risk of harm to others in all cases, and make sure that all risks are reviewed appropriately and managed effectively 
 
5. Develop victim and restorative justice processes to meet the needs of potential and actual victims, and ensure that opportunities for restorative justice are considered in every relevant case 
 
6. review the out-of-court disposal processes, and make sure that tools used for assessment, planning and decision-making enable full consideration of safety and wellbeing and risk of harm to others. 
 
The Director of Children's Services should: 
7. make sure that all children and young people receive their statutory entitlement to education and have access to high-quality education and training services that are matched to their needs and interests 
 
8. make sure that assessment tools, appropriate systems and procedures are in place to obtain the data and information needed to analyse service delivery and track improvements 
9. ensure that Board members scrutinise the delivery of youth justice services, including out-of-court work, challenge each other, and advocate for children and young people in their own services. 	 
ACTION AND IMPROVEMENT PLAN 
Priority and Work stream One: Leadership and Governance Outcomes required Risks Timescale Success criteria Right structure to oversee and direct the YOS Current combined Board structure is too high level. Senior partners do not engage sufficiently to enable effective leadership  January 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
Evidence of improvement through the 
efforts of the 
Board Challenge and support for YOS This is a large task at a time when significant change and improvement is required March 2020 Challenge and support to and from Partners Requires culture change to properly challenge each other March 2020 Board members advocate for children and young people in their own services. must first know what the needs are of this cohort and this profile information is not yet in place January 2020 ongoing Board members scrutinise the delivery of youth justice services, including out-of-court work, to assess the quality of service delivery 
 Board members need to learn how to measure quality in the youth justice domain. 
Ongoing work requiring time commitment from Board members  
October 2019 ongoing  
Reports, audits and scrutiny on the agenda of the Board.  
Work streams evidence scrutiny of practice. The Board encourages transparency and challenge relating to obstacles or barriers to providing services to young people who offend. Insufficient processes up, down and through the service and no awareness of how to challenge February 2020 The Board is furnished with the information to determine if the current structure or staffing are sufficient to deliver effective youth justice services. Performance manager has 
just left and data officer is also leaving - significant risk in providing the right information October 2019 Performance reports analysing the cohort & highlighting gaps The Board will be regularly attended by statutory and non-statutory partners Competing priorities and the additional time commitment that will be needed September 2019 ongoing Attendance register shows buy-in from all statutory partners Board have set the vision and plan for Youth Justice Services in Surrey and these are communicated to all service staff. Service staff are getting to grips with large scale change and time/energy to do this is 
not found November 2019  
Supervision and appraisal show good understanding of governance and vision All service staff are aware of the function and purpose of the Youth Justice Board, its members and its work. As above March 2020 Board ensure progress is being made against the inspection through commissioning of a peer review in 2020 Need to secure the availability of peer partners in practice. Mid 2020 Positive report from peer review.  	 
Priority & Work Stream Two: Data, Performance & Information Outcomes required Risks Timescale Success criteria Strategic profile of young people offending and at risk of offending Performance manager post newly recruited to. End of Q4 19/20 Data and reports enable the Board to direct services appropriately to need Agreed performance data set for the Board As above December 2019 Set of routine management report tools As above December 2019 Quality assurance framework is in place and QA findings are reported to the Board so that quality of practice can be scrutinised, celebrated or challenged/improved. Operational management capacity in the central team January 2020 Regular QA provides themes which are addressed 
and measured 
for 
improvement Information sharing agreements are in place Capacity within organisations November 2019 IG compliance Feedback and involving young people. Resources to operationalise December 2019 and ongoing Evidence of service redesign through feedback The various assessment tools and recording systems across the service have been reviewed and it is now possible to capture accurate data relating to desistance needs, safety and wellbeing and risk of harm. Resources, skills, time and funding constraints December 2019 Case level information is in one place Systems allow capture of the right information Suitable assessment tools are in place to support the accurate assessment of risk to a child or young 
person's safety and wellbeing and risk of harm to others in all cases Delay in end to end review of EHM and LCS 
Skills and capacity to make changes within systems December 2019 Risks for young people, victims and community are safely managed Assessment tools, appropriate systems and procedures are in place to obtain the data and information needed to analyse 
service delivery and track improvements YOS operational management capacity New Interim YOS manager January 2020 Board is satisfied that the service is improving Case recording is reflected across systems and is child 
centred Challenge in effective processes with children open to CSC January 2020 Both YOS system and CSC system evidence planning together for the child Data and intelligence is used to support commissioning of service related to need Performance manager has 
just left and data officer is also leaving - significant risk in providing the right information End of Q4 1019/20 Evidenced through the Board.  	 
Priority & Work Stream Three: Review & Re-design of OOCDs Outcomes required Risks Timescale Success criteria Robust management framework for OOCDs: 
decision making and delivery Time and resource 
Possible conflict with new Checkpoint processes. Needs system impact assessment  September 2019 and ongoing Compliant with guidelines Communication of new framework and process Involves many stakeholders including young people who are used to current system Takes time January 2020 New framework is understood The out-of-court disposal process uses effective tools for assessment, planning and decision-making which enable full consideration of safety and wellbeing and risk of harm to others. Delay in end to end review of EHM and LCS 
Skills and capacity to make changes within systems December 2019 Risks for young people, victims and community are safely managed Victims are routinely contacted as part of our work Needs discrete resource: element of re-structure required January 2020 Regular QA provides themes which are addressed 
and measured for 
improvement The decision to impose an outof-court disposal is always based on a written assessment Re-design process will be staged although remedial process currently in place for safe practice. December 2019 Compliance with YJB guidance The suitability and 
effectiveness of current joint decision-making processes and assessment tools have been reviewed Not previously measured effectiveness robustly - new process. 
Performance Manager post vacant September 2019 and ongoing Compliance with guidance  
 	 
Priority & Work Stream Four: Pathways & Partnerships Outcomes required Risks Timescale Success criteria YP in the YJ system have good access to services from the statutory partnership: Police, Health, Education 
Children's Social Care, 
Probation(NPS) May take time to change contracts, SLAs and to embed new pathways September 2019 and ongoing Pathways and timescales are clear and effective for staff and young people All children and young people receive their statutory entitlement to education and have access to high-quality education and 
training services that are matched to their needs and interests Post-16 services not well defined/resourced 
Accuracy of the information received 
 January 2020 but work has started ETE status of young people offending improves Physical and mental health services is easily accessible to young people who offend as well as Speech, Language & communication therapy. Currently no physical health 
or SLT resource in the service 
 March 2020 Assessed health needs are met through arrangements Where appropriate Substance Misuse services are being referred to. Perceived issue with consent and sharing information Demand and resource - high numbers of young people December 2019 Assessed SM needs are met through arrangements Liaison and Diversion is seen as integral to Youth Justice work in Surrey Processes not fully embedded as relatively new November 2019 Young people diverted as soon as possible where appropriate Continued support from ACT - review of who is AiM2 trained in the TYS/SAT teams Requires skills audit January 2020 HSBs receive appropriate professional support Access to specific projects i.e. sliding doors is county wide 
and not based on quadrant availability Capacity of staff to codeliver 
Programme scale March 2020 Programmes and services available to all as appropriate Strategic and operational levels, partnership arrangements facilitate the delivery of effective practice. Operational management capacity January 2020 YP have access to skills and expertise   
 	 
Priority & Work Stream Five: Staffing & Skills Outcomes required Risks Timescale Success criteria The workforce is equipped to deliver services to young people in the YJ system Re-structure instability Scale of training and support required January 2020 ongoing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YP have access to skills and 
expertise 
 Training is commissioned to develop staff skills and knowledge in key areas of practice specific to working with children and young people in the youth justice system Resources and time February 2020 All staff receive regular support from a manager with knowledge of youth justice work and that management oversight is consistent, effective and makes a difference to the quality of work Less managers than required across the quadrants - some areas lack experience October 2019 A training and skills plan is in place to develop staff skills, knowledge and development, this is supported by evidenced based practice. Resources and time January 2020 Management oversight is effective, provides challenge and influences the quality of 
work delivered Time to embed 
Operational management capacity October 2019 Better outcomes and impact for yp Work is allocated to specialist staff skilled and trained in Youth Justice work. Less skilled staff than currently required 
Workload analysis required August 2019 and ongoing  
 
 
YP have access to skills and expertise Skill sharing across specialist partners i.e. probation, police, health, social workers Time to build relationships and processes February 2020 Training provided to panel members  Capacity and roles December 2019 Victim and restorative justice processes are developed to meet the needs of potential and actual victims, and ensure that opportunities for restorative processes are considered in every case Potential restructure to meet this need 
Requires specific focus February 2020 Victims are satisfied with their experience Young people have opportunity to repair harm  	 




1 
 

1 
 



1 
 





1 
 

23 
 





