




SWANSEA YOUTH JUSTICE TEAM

Strategic Plan

2019-2020



Contents

1.	Introduction and Context	3
2.	Review of 2018- 2019	5
3.	Strategic aims and priorities for 2019 - 2020	6
4.   Structure and Governance........................................................7
5.	Resources and Value for Money	9
6.	Partnership Arrangements	9
7.	Key Challenges and Risks to Future Delivery	15
8.   Key Performance indicators   .................................................15
















     
1. Introduction and Context

The Youth Justice Plan for Swansea Youth Justice Team (SYJT) 2019/20 is produced in accordance with the duty imposed within Section 40 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 for each local authority, in consultation with partner agencies, to formulate and implement a Youth Justice Plan each year. This plan sets out 'how' youth justice services in the area are to be provided and funded, and what functions the Youth Justice Team will carry out. The plan largely follows the format as laid out within the Youth Justice Board document: 'Youth Justice Plans: YJB Practice Note for Youth Offending Partnerships' and acknowledges and adheres to the Terms and Conditions of the Youth Justice Grant 2019/2020. Ideally, the plan would present an overview of key trends within the national and local youth justice system and discuss appropriate local responses. Whilst plans in future will reflect this information, it is not possible to include such analysis in the 2019/20 plan due to significant recent reorganisation of the service and what this means for the local ability to produce relevant data.
In 2014, three local authority areas, Bridgend, Neath Port Talbot and Swansea, combined to form the Western Bay Youth Justice and early Intervention Service. HMIP Probation carried out a full joint inspection of Western Bay in November 2018, the findings reported in March 2019 rated the service as 'inadequate'. The foreword of the report notes,

'This joint inspection found that this amalgamation has been implemented poorly and that none of the three local authorities has taken full responsibility for the service. This lies at the heart of many of the problems we identify in this report.'
							(HMIP 2019; p3)

In response, between the execution of the inspection and the publication of the report, the decision was taken, at the local authority executive level, to disaggregate Western Bay into its three constituent local authorities and localise youth justice services. Swansea Youth Justice Team, operating within the City and County of Swansea (CCOS) boundary came into being on April 1st 2019. This resulted in the disaggregation of all information held on Childview, which was migrated back to the county of residence of the service users; all staff, many of whom worked across county boundaries, were similarly reintegrated. In the short to medium term, this resulted in localised vacancies and some service delivery disruption. The Western Bay Youth Justice Management Board was decommissioned and a separate management board for each local authority constituted in its place.
Since April 1st 2019, the Swansea Youth Justice Team has faced the challenges of the reorganisation brought about by disaggregation and responding to the serious shortcomings identified in the Western Bay inspection report. Consequently, these will inform the focus of much of the work in the year 2019/20. 
Additionally, the plan acknowledges the ever changing landscape within the criminal justice system, particularly recent, current and future changes linked to funding, local priorities and changes to service delivery. The plan acknowledges the necessary focus of ensuring continuity and improvement of Youth Justice Service provision in CCOS as a result of reorganisation and the development and implementation of the new National Standards for Youth Justice Framework.
This plan acknowledges the 'Review of the Youth Justice System in England and Wales' as compiled by Charlie Taylor (current Chair of the Youth Justice Board) during 2016/17, as well as more recent reviews in both England and Wales that will, to a large extent, inform the future development of the service and regional youth justice practice. In Wales, the Welsh Government Community Safety Division has been leading on the development of a 'Blueprint' for the delivery of youth justice services. The YJB in Wales has been invited to advise on the Blueprint which sets out a recommended vision for youth justice in Wales, and elements of the recommendations will relate to some of the content set out within this plan.
Finally, there are indications from the Ministry of Justice that there are likely to be changes in the way that grant funding is to be allocated to Local Authorities in 2019/20. Alongside this, there is work being developed in order to create a single integrated approach to early intervention and prevention across Swansea, via the 'Flexible Funding Pathfinder' overseen by Welsh Government. The potential risks/impact of the above means that there is currently some uncertainty for youth justice services as we enter into the next financial year.



2. Review of 2018/19 
As outlined above, WBYJEIS underwent a full joint inspection in November 2018; the inspection, published in March 2019, included the recommendations that; 

(HMIP 2019)

In the light of this and that the 2018/19 plan was for Western Bay, which no longer exists, any review which looks further than the need to respond to the inspection and reorganisation would appear superfluous. However, this report notes the continued year on year reduction in the numbers for the three key England and Wales Key Performance Indicators (more detail below).
The out of court disposal scheme, Bureau, continues to operate well reflecting good operational relationships between the Youth Justice Team and South Wales Police. This is one of the few areas identified in the report in positive terms. In Swansea, the management of the seconded police officers is being moved from Community Safety to IOM.
The Enhanced Case Management ECM programme ended during this period. The ECM approach was trialled as an approach to deal effectively with young people who offend and who have been subject to Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE's). This programme is being fully evaluated with the possibility of being taken forward as a partnership between YJB Cymru, Welsh Government, All Wales Forensic Adolescent Consultation and Treatment Service, South Wales Police and Crime Commissioner, Public Health Wales and South Wales YOS's. In the continued absence of a dedicated mental health provision for Swansea Youth Justice Team, this was an important project. 

3. Strategic Aims and Priorities for 2019/20
The aims and priorities for the coming year are detailed in the strategic and improvement plan embedded below. This reflects the work necessary to establish the new Swansea team following the separation from Western Bay and the improvements demanded by the inspection report.
The new Swansea Youth Justice Management Board, with the support of YJB Cymru, will continue to develop the skills and knowledge necessary to support the team and the delivery of effective youth justice services in CCOS. 

						




	To deliver effective and high quality youth justice service across Swansea in acknowledgment of the key findings of the HMIP Full Joint Inspection and the related actions set out within the 2019/2020 Improvement Plan. The overarching objectives are:-

1) To develop and improve performance systems against the Youth Justice Board outcome indicators and the devolved performance measures for Wales, with particular attention to the rates and frequency of reoffending amongst a relatively small cohort of young people.
 
2) To develop robust operational and quality assurance systems, with stronger emphasis on accountability at every level of the service. 

3) To ensure the service users voice is evident at every part of the YJS daily operations and strategic development and governance. 

4) To review, develop and strengthen relevant partnership approaches and agreements to achieve common goals and provide effective services to young people and their communities via the provision of youth justice and mainstream services. 

5) To invest, develop and ensure the development of staff to promote a skilled, resilient and well-motivated workforce. 

6) To continue to review and evaluate the service against a backdrop of potential funding changes/challenges and ensure the YJS can meet the demands ahead and deliver its objectives. 

It's important to note that due to the outcomes of the inspection report, Swansea YJS is focused on its improvement plan and journey. This is the focus for the next 12 to 18 months. At the point of the review, the service will then focus on its longer term strategic focus. 

4. Structure and Governance
The Swansea Youth Justice Team delivers youth justice services across the City and County Of Swansea out of two locations; the Dynefor Centre, the main office based in Swansea city centre, and the Intervention centre situated in an industrial area on the outskirts of the city. The Dynefor Centre is the administrative centre and base for the social work staff whilst most programme/activity delivery takes place at the intervention centre.
The new strategic lead for Swansea Youth Justice Team is a Principal Officer working to the head of children's services. The YJT strategic lead also manages the BAYS+ 16+ service and Barnardos Leaving Care team. This role means the principal officer has oversight of key adolescent services within Swansea Child and Family Services. The aim of this role is to ensure greater alignment between these services and ensure there is a stronger strategic focus on the needs of adolescents. The strategic leads role is to represent Swansea Youth Justice Service at relevant boards and support the Youth Justice Team to develop and shape its services to meet the needs of Swansea's young people. The strategic lead oversees the Interim Operational Manager and assist in both the oversight of the service but also supports the Operational Manager to carry out their role.  
Working to the Youth Justice Team Principal Officer is an Operational Manager (interim), who oversees two Practice Leads and a senior practitioner. The Practice Leads oversee prevention and out of court work and post court and ISS respectively. The Senior Practitioner post is a new one, the post holder will be in post in October 2019. The appointee is an experienced social worker from a child protection team and will have responsibility for overseeing effective responses to child protection, child exploitation and safeguarding concerns. The new senior practitioner will also take some of the staff supervisory responsibilities from the operational manager.
The previously constituted Referral Order and 'High Risk' teams will be brought into one team to work more generically. This will make the service more resilient when staff are absent and reflects the continuing shift from statutory intervention work towards prevention and early intervention.
The YJT is well served by good partnership working with a local substance misuse agency, which has seconded a member of staff into the team. The team also includes two seconded Youth Justice Police officers, specialist Education Training and Employment practitioner, and Reparation Coordinator. The posts or services that were lost or disrupted because of the disaggregation will be filled shortly; the seconded probation officer (1.5 days per week) will start in October 2019 and speech and language services will be in place by the start of 2020. The operational structure of the YJT is embedded below.


The inspection report was critical of the WBYJEIS management board. The report details the expected improvements in the newly formed Swansea management board. The Board met for the first time in July 2019 and is due to meet again at the end of October 2019. It is envisaged that Board meetings will be bi monthly initially although this is open to review as the Board is committed to supporting the improvements needed in the delivery of youth justice services in Swansea. The membership of the board as it stands is embedded below. It is expected that this will develop over time as individuals and organisations with the expertise to develop and deliver services are invited to contribute.
						
5. Resourcing and Value for Money
The settlements agreed across the partnership for 2018/19 remained at a flat rate with minimal change to the level of grants. In real terms however, this represents a reduction of funding as costs increase with no corresponding proportionate uplift to funding. Due to the complex manner in which the YOS is funded and the potential changes ahead as mentioned in section 1, planning for the medium to longer term remains a challenge there will no doubt be a requirement for a review of the service in its current form. 

AgencyStaffing CostsPayments in kindOther delegated fundsTotalPolice100,841100,841PCC29,00034,00063,000Probation29,00029,000Health0Local Authority631,00073,700704,700Welsh Government322,000322,000YJB360,00037,300398,000Other28,10028,100Total1,342,800129,841173,1001,645,741

6. Partnership Arrangements
Situated in the middle of the South Wales coast, Swansea is the second largest city in Wales and the regional centre of South West Wales. Swansea's two neighbouring local authorities are Carmarthenshire to the west and Neath Port Talbot to the east. The City & County, which has a land area of 378 square kilometres, can be broadly divided into four geographic areas: the open moorlands of the Lliw Uplands in the north; the rural Gower Peninsula in the west; the suburban area stretching from the edge of Swansea towards settlements in the west and around the M4 corridor; and the coastal strip around Swansea Bay, which includes the city centre and adjacent district centres including Uplands, Sketty and Mumbles. 

To better understand the context within which Swansea Youth Justice Service operates within a demographic overview is helpful. The latest official estimate of the population of the City and County of Swansea stands at 246,500 (mid-2018, Office for National Statistics / ONS).  Swansea has the second highest population of the 22 Welsh local authorities, representing almost 8% of the total population of Wales (3,138,600).

The average population density of the county is 638 people per sq. km (2015 estimate), the sixth highest of the 22 local authorities in Wales (average: 149 people per sq. km). 

Swansea also has a lower percentage aged 5-15, at 11.9% (29,400 children), than Wales (12.6%) and the UK (13.1%). 34,700 (14.1%) of Swansea's population are young people aged 16-24, a noticeably higher proportion than Wales (11.0%) and the UK (10.7%), in part due to students.

The population is not evenly distributed within Swansea, with most people living within the urban area and the surrounding settlements to the north, including Morriston (the second highest ward population; around 16,500 in 2015), Clydach, Gorseinon and Pontarddulais. 

Ward level estimates of population density (2011 Census) reveal high concentrations of population in and immediately around the city centre (Castle Ward), the adjacent wards of Cwmbwrla and Uplands (6,800 people per sq. km, the highest population density in the county), and also in Townhill and Penderry.

The research indicates that in 2016 around 19,000 people in Swansea (approximately 8% of its total population of 245,000) were from a non-white ethnic group. A further 7,000 people were in the category 'All Other White', leading to an estimated 26,000 people (around 11% of
the total Swansea population in 2016) being non- 'White British'.
These estimates indicate that around 18,000 people in Swansea (approximately 7% of the total population) were of non-British nationality, and 227,000 (approx. 93%) were of British nationality. In these figures, nationality is as stated by the survey respondent when interviewed, and (unlike country of birth) can be subject to change. At a wider level, an
estimated 4% of people in Wales and 9% of people in the UK stated their nationality as non-British. No further breakdown of nationality is available from this particular source.
These estimates suggest that there were around 108,200 households in Swansea in 2017, within a total of 1.349 million households in Wales Between 2007 and 2017, the estimated number of households in Swansea increased by around 8,500 (+8.5%), with average household size decreasing over this period from 2.29 to 2.23 people.
In these estimates, single adult households and 2 adult 0 child households are the most common household types in Swansea, with notable increases between 2007 and 2017 in these household types plus the 4+ adult 0 child categories. By contrast, the number of households with 2 adults and more than 1 child decreased over the period. The total number of households (with residents) in Swansea in mid-2017 is estimated at 108,200 (rounded), an increase of approximately 700 (or 0.7%) on the 2016 figure. Since 2007, the number of households in Swansea has increased by 8,500 (+8.5%), with average household size falling from 2.29 people (2007) to 2.23 people (2017).

In 2017, single-adult households (37,500 / 34.7% of the total) and 2-person 0-children households (31,800 / 29.4%) were the most common household types in Swansea. Between 2007 and 2017, the number of single-person households increased by around 5,400 (+16.8%), with other significant change occurring in 2-adult 0-child households (an increase of 2,100 or 7.2%) and 4+adult 0-children households (an increase of 700 or
18.6%); partly reflecting an increase in student households. By contrast, the number of 2- adult, 1 (or more) child households in Swansea has fallen by 400 (-1.8%) over the ten-year period

The YJS falls within the regional footprint of Swansea Bay University Health board as well as the wider footprint areas of South Wales Police, South Wales Fire and Rescue and Her Majesty Court and tribunal Services. This regional footprint, which is recognised via the Welsh Government (WG) and the YOS in partnership with both Local Authority Community Safety arrangements, has been successful in securing regional funding via the 'Promoting Positive Engagement in Young People' (PPEYP) fund (formerly known as the Youth Crime Prevention Fund). This fund has been utilised to resource the prevention service within Swansea YJS, and is now included within the Children and communities Grant Flexible Funding Pilot. 

Swansea Youth Offending Service is one of seven YOS's covering the South Wales area (Cwm Taf, Cardiff, Vale of Glamorgan, and Neath Port Talbot and Bridgend). The seven YOS Managers meet quarterly in order to examine options for collaborative working and to promote consistency of service across the South Wales region.
 
There exists a broad range of collaborative arrangements and initiatives across the regional footprint area of Swansea at both strategic and operational levels. 

• Swansea YJS and NPT Youth Justice Services work closely in partnership with each other particularly in relation to the safeguarding board which continues under the Western Bay safeguarding board arrangements. Both YOT's sit on this board and strategic safeguarding work is jointly managed under this arrangement.
 
• Swansea YJS and NPT and Swansea Bay University Health board share joint collective agreements regarding the SALT service which is tripartite funded between each LA. The development of the early help hub offer, which currently involves a large number of multiagency partners, also has input form the Youth Justice Services. These hubs consist of a combined offer of police, health and education. Swansea YJS is also a part of some key strategic drivers, which include: The Well-Being strategy, Adolescent strategy and Contextual safeguarding. All of which are shaping the way services are being delivered but also heavily promote alignment of services and joined up work. The YJS is a significant member of each of these strategies. 


• The YJS Manager and Principal Officer are members of YOT Managers Cymru, which meets in order to share good practice, discuss policy implications and devise joint responses to consider policy, and wider strategic and political issues that impact upon the functioning of Youth Justice within the Welsh setting.
 
• The YJS works with a range of partners, including police to target hot spots of anti-social behaviour and provide targeted diversionary responses at identified times, for example, Friday nights, GCSE result times, Halloween etc. A strategic YOS/Police partnership meeting is held bi-monthly and there has been an initial central BCU police/ partnership meeting held to provide consistency regarding the role of YOS police officers across South Wales. 

• The YJS currently commissions services from Barod, however, work is currently being developed to create an Integrated Substance Misuse Service. 

• The YJS convenes and chairs High Risk Panels (HRPs) in order to ensure robust and coordinated multi-agency planning for young people. 

• Up to date service level agreements exist between the YJS and partners, including: 

Health 
Local Education Authorities
Court  
Barod and Choices (Young people substance misuse service). 
National Probation Service

• The YJS has continued to review the Youth Bureau and its processes and continues to make practice changes in accordance with service demand to support and maintain the effectiveness of Out of Court Disposal work. 

• The YJS continues to be able to access Forensic (Tier 3) CAMHS via a monthly clinic. This is provides a forum in which case managers can discuss issues regarding children and young people. 

• The YJS has contributed to the development of a regional Speech and Language Service, which is due to begin in January 2020. This service will provide both a consultancy and case management service, along with a service development function.

• The YJS Information Officer attends the South Wales Information Officer Group (SWIOG). 

• The seven South Wales YJS areas commission joint training when appropriate. 

• The Principal Officer now attends the Serious Violence Reduction task and finish group which is a South Wales initiative to tackle serious violence and knife crime at a national level. 

• The YJS Manager sits on the Community Safety Partnership Steering Group and Area Planning Board. 

• As the YJS are partaking in a pilot for 'Enhanced Case Management' (ECM), staff are able to access clinical supervision undertaken by a clinical psychologist. 

• The YJS Operational Manager attends the ECM Operational Group. This group has been instrumental in terms of overseeing and developing the pilot. 

• The YJS Operational Manager attends the ACE's advisory group. This group assists to lead the development of an ACE informed workforce. 

• The YJS has representation on the Channel Panel. YJS refers and takes recommendations from the Panel. Channel Panel is a programme that focuses on providing support at an early stage to people who are identified as being vulnerable to being drawn into terrorism. The programme uses a multi-agency approach to protect vulnerable people by: 

• identifying individuals at risk 
•  assessing the nature and extent of that risk
•  developing the most appropriate support plan for the individuals concerned 

• Channel Panel may be appropriate for anyone who is vulnerable to being drawn into any form of terrorism. The Panel attempts to ensure that vulnerable children and adults of any faith, ethnicity or background receive support before their vulnerabilities are exploited by those who would want them to embrace terrorism, and before they become involved in terrorist activity.

• The YJS also attends and refers into the MAPPA process. High risk cases are screened and discussed with the responsible Practice Lead who then supports the referral into the MAPPA process.

7. Achievements and Risks against the Youth Justice Outcome Measures.
The YJS working towards maintaining a steady performance against most of the national and devolved indicators. However, it is recognised that work is continually required to deal more effectively with the rate of reoffending (and more recently, the frequency of offending) amongst a relatively small cohort of young people. These young people present with a range of, often complex, challenges across a number of service areas.
 
As noted in the introduction, risks highlighted as a result of financial efficiencies and strategic change may well impact on aspects of future service delivery and it is worthy of note that as a consequence, priorities may require adjustment should the YJS need to maintain the quality of its service and achieve good outcomes for young people and families. 

Due to the means by which the data for first time entrants and re-offending is established via the Police National Computer (PNC), the YJS currently has no means by which to ensure the accuracy of this data against local data. Indeed, there have been occasions where, for example, the data for first time entrants reported upon within the Youth Data Set (YDS) is at odds with local data. The YJS, in conjunction with YOT Managers Cymru is attempting to resolve this with the Ministry of Justice. 

8. Key Performance Indicators
Using the information that is available to us, factoring in that the reported performance figures for this year are all based on the now disaggregated Western Bay Service, it would show that the performance in relation to First Time Entrants has remained at a similar level, reoffending has increased and the use of custody has reduced.
In 2018 -19, in Western Bay it would show that at total of 390 offences were committed resulting in 191 disposals, however in 2017-18 there were 320 offences resulting in 163 disposals showing an increase from the previous year.  
(Source - Youth Data Summary for England and Wales Apr 19 - Mar 19)

Local reporting for Swansea, which is slightly different as it won't include disposal types where there is no intervention shows that for 2018-19 there were 184 offences resulting in 62 disposals compared to 189 offences with 52 disposals for the previous year.  Therefore showing a slight decrease in offence but an increase in the number of disposals.  

Source - Local Performance Measures - Swansea 2018-19 and Local Performance Measures - Swansea 2017-18, Local Performance Measures - Western Bay 2018-19 and Local Performance Measures Western Bay 2017-18 .

FIRST TIME ENTRANTS

Local Data - Swansea only

The total FTE's for 2018/19 was 31 compared to the previous year where the total number of FTE's for 2017/18 was 32. Again showing consistency around this area of performance.

Source - Local Performance Measures - Swansea 2018-19 and Local Performance Measures - Swansea 2017-18.

Achieving reductions will be a challenge in the coming year and the service will aim to maintain current FTE levels, with continued focus on effective assessment and diversion interventions in partnership with Police and through early help strategies in Swansea.
REDUCE REOFFENDING

Youth Data Summary - Western Bay

Most recent national data (July 2016-June 2017) indicates an increase in the binary reoffending rate from 47.4% in July 2015-June 2017, to 51.5%, this is a 4.1% rise. South Wales figure is 50.2% yet Wales is 46.9%
However there is a decrease in the frequency rate from 3.32 to 3.20 which equals a  -3.8% change. 
To give some context of the cohort sizes, in July 2010- June 2011 there were 783 young people in the offending cohort, with 323 reoffenders committing 959 reoffences  The cohort reported on above has 169 young people in it with 87 reoffenders committing 278 reoffences.
Source - Youth Data Summary for England and Wales Apr 19 - Mar 19
There is no local data available for this KPI.
Reducing reoffending amongst young people subject to a Court Order remains a challenge year on year as these young people are likely to be more persistent and entrenched in their offending behaviour and have multiple, complex needs, requiring specialist input, assessment, risk management and support from experienced and suitably qualified practitioners in the multi-agency teams.

Devolved indicators

Youth Data Summary - Western Bay

There has been consistently low rates of custody with Western Bay reducing from 12 young people sentenced to custody in 2016-17, then 9 in 2017-18 and finally in 2018-19 there were just 6 young people sentenced to custody.
National data for 2018-19 indicates a use of custody rate per 1000 10-17 population for Western Bay was 0.13 compared to 0.33 for South Wales and 0.29 for Wales.
Source - Youth Data Summary for England and Wales Apr 19 - Mar 19 





Local Data - Swansea only

Swansea Locality had no young people sentenced to custody in 2018-19.  This is a decrease from the previous year when there were 5 from our area.
Given such low rates of custody it is likely that there will be some increase in the coming reporting periods.


REMAND

In 2018-19, 3 young people in Swansea were remanded for a total of 320 bed nights while awaiting to go back to court or awaiting transfer to a more suitable placement.  
The three young people in question highlight ongoing issues within Swansea.  One young person is part of the travelling community and another had recently moved here from England having been identified as a victim of modern day slavery and 'county lines'. The third young person needed a secure hospital placement to address his mental health needs. Because of the lack of a suitable placement this young person was held on remand in a secure children's home for a longer period than was necessary. This is an unusually high amount of remand and we wouldn't normally expect to see this repeated.

WELSH YOUTH JUSTICE INDICATORS

These figures were reported in this time period for the whole of Western Bay, of which Swansea was a part. Therefore a review of these may not have much meaning for the Swansea only Youth Justice Team in the coming year.  However to give an overview, Western Bay data has been used.

Engagement in ETE - Western Bay saw an increase of average hours attended by school age young people of 33% by the end of their order.  However this is below the target of 25 hours attendance per week.   Again those above school age there was an increase in average hours attended at the end of the order by 34%.  However this is also below the target of 16 hours per week.


Access to Suitable Accommodation - 10 young people were not in suitable accommodation at the end of their order or licence period which is 13% of the total number of young people reported on in this period.

Access to Substance Misuse Services - 72% of the reporting cohort were identified as having a Substance Misuse issue.  Everyone who commenced an assessment did so within 5 days of referral and 100% received a service within 10 days. 

Access to Mental Health Services - The reported figure would show that 100% of those commencing an assessment did so within the 28-day target and that 100% of those assessed received a service within 28 days. However, when looking at the actual numbers this equals only 1 young person, despite the fact that 39 young people were identified as requiring an assessment. (see appendix 3)This is 52% of the cohort. The majority of the young people will have been encouraged to gain access to services via other routes, such as through School or GP's - these are then counted in the 'Number currently in receipt of a MH Service', which is again misleading. This has been the case since there has been no Mental Health worker within the team, neither in Swansea nor across Western Bay. At present access to mental health services specific the Youth Justice Team in Swansea consists of 1/2 a day per month of consultancy with a consultant psychologist in the Neath Port Talbot Youth Justice Team office. 




 
David Howes
Director of Social Services


19


